 Enterprise 
Risk Management 
First Edition 
Instructor Compendium of Questions and Answers 
•	Review Questions
•	Short Answer Questions
•	Multiple-Choice Questions
•	True or False Question
Paul Fontaine 
 
 
ENTERPRISE RISK MANAGEMENT - First Edition 
Instructor Compendium of Questions and Answers 
Paul Fontaine 
Copyright © 2022, Noranda Education Inc. All rights reserved.  
Noranda is a trademark of Noranda Education Inc. and its affiliated company. 
This Instructor Compendium of Questions and Answers is published under license by Noranda Publishing Ltd., a subsidiary of Noranda Education Inc. It is strictly and exclusively intended for instructors who have formally adopted the Noranda Education textbook Enterprise Risk Management, First Edition, for higher education courses, and who wish to use the proposed questions included in this compendium for student testing and examination purposes. 
No part of this publication may be used, reproduced, copied, scanned, digitized, recorded or transmitted in any form or by any means outside of its intended use without prior written permission from Noranda Education. Permissions for using text or materials from this book beyond its intended use, should be made by contacting www.NorandaEducation.com using the Contact Us webform available. 
Care has been taken to develop questions and answers based on the contents of Enterprise Risk Management, First Edition, and to cross-reference the answers to our textbook. However, we cannot guarantee that this Instructor Compendium of Questions and Answers is free from possible errors. We welcome information or feed-back that enables us to make edits and corrections for subsequent editions. 
Noranda Education sincerely acknowledges the work and dedication of the author in completing this compendium, and the contributions of external advisors who provided advice and support for developing the original textbook. Their names are not disclosed for reasons of privacy and confidentiality. 
For questions, comments or feed-back, please do not hesitate to contact us. 
Noranda Education Inc. 
1730 St-Laurent Blvd., Suite 800 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1G 5L1 
Visit our website at www.NorandaEducation.com 
CONTENTS 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 	  v
PREFACE 	vi
CHAPTER 1  Risk Management Awareness 	1 
	Review Questions 	1 
	Other Short Answer Questions 	5 
	Multiple Choice Questions 	7 
	True or False Questions 	11 
CHAPTER 2  Risk Management Concepts 	14 
	Review Questions 	14 
	Other Short Answer Questions 	22 
	Multiple Choice Questions 	24 
	True or False Questions 	28 
CHAPTER 3  Risk Management Framework 	31 
	Review Questions 	31 
	Other Short Answer Questions 	39 
	Multiple Choice Questions 	41 
	True or False Questions 	46 
CHAPTER 4  Risk Management Process 	50 
	Review Questions 	50 
	Other Short Answer Questions 	57 
	Multiple Choice Questions 	61 
	True or False Questions 	67 
CHAPTER 5  Risk Response 	72 
	Review Questions 	72 
	Other Short Answer Questions 	82 
	Multiple Choice Questions 	86 
	True or False Questions 	93 
CHAPTER 6  Risk Management Integration 	98 
	Review Questions 	98 
	Other Short Answer Questions 	108 
	Multiple Choice Questions 	112 
	True or False Questions 	119 
CHAPTER 7  Strategy Risks 	126 
	Review Questions 	126 
	Other Short Answer Questions 	136 
	Multiple Choice Questions 	142 
	True or False Questions 	151 
CHAPTER 8  Organizational Alignment Risks 	158 
Review Questions 	158 
Other Short Answer Questions 	167 
Multiple Choice Questions 	171 
True or False Questions 	182 
iii 

Contents 		iv
CHAPTER 9  Operations Management Risks 
	Review Questions 	188 
	Other Short Answer Questions 	196 
	Multiple Choice Questions 	201 
	True or False Questions 	210 	188 	
CHAPTER 10  Marketing and Sales Risks 
	Review Questions 	217 
	Other Short Answer Questions 	225 
	Multiple Choice Questions 	229 
	True or False Questions 	241 	217 	
CHAPTER 11  Human Resource Management Risks 
	Review Questions 	247 
	Other Short Answer Questions 	260 
	Multiple Choice Questions 	265 
	True or False Questions 	278 	247 	
CHAPTER 12  Financial Management and Accounting Risks 
	Review Questions 	286 
	Other Short Answer Questions 	296 
	Multiple Choice Questions 	300 
	True or False Questions 	312 	286 	
CHAPTER 13  Information Management and Technology Risks 
	Review Questions 	319 
	Other Short Answer Questions 	329 
	Multiple Choice Questions 	335 
	True or False Questions 	351 	319 	
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Paul Fontaine is an accomplished professional who specializes in risk management and control. He holds a B.Com. and MBA from the Telfer School of Management of the University of Ottawa, Canada. Paul is also a Chartered Professional Accountant (CPA, Canada), a Certified Management Consultant (CMC, Canada), and a Certified Internal Auditor (CIA). In addition, he holds a Certification in Risk Management Assurance (CRMA) from the Institute of Internal Auditors, and a Professional Certificate in Risk Management from the Sprott School of Business of the Carleton University in Ottawa. Paul also completed the Canadian Enterprise Risk Management (CRM-E) professional designation of the Risk and Insurance Management Society (RIMS). 
Paul has thirty years of experience in audit, risk management and control, including three years with Ernst & Young, and seven years with Deloitte Consulting. As a management consultant for more than twenty years, many of his projects involved developing risk profiles, risk management action plans, risk management policies and guidelines, risk management and control frameworks, and risk-based audit plans for internal audit. Paul continues his work in enterprise risk management as an author and publisher. He offers education and professional training services in risk management, and volunteers to speak at professional and academic conferences. In his spare time, Paul enjoys hockey, movies, music, fine arts, performing arts and the company of friends. 
 v
PREFACE 
This Instructor Compendium of Questions and Answers is strictly and exclusively intended for instructors who have formally adopted the Noranda Education textbook Enterprise Risk Management, First Edition, for higher education courses, and who wish to use the proposed questions included in this compendium for student testing and examination purposes.  
The questions and answers included in this compendium reflect the topics considered most important for student learning. The questions and answers include: 
•	Review Questions - which are those outlined at the end of each chapter in the textbook.
•	Other Short Answer Questions - which are similar in format, but different from the Review Questions.
•	Multiple-Choice Questions - which cover the same topics as the Review and Other Short Answer Questions.
•	True/False Questions - which also cover the same topics as the Review and Other Short Answer Questions.
The questions are grouped by chapter and their totals are as follows: 
CHAPTERS 	REVIEW QUESTIONS 	OTHER SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS 	MULTIPLE-CHOICE QUESTIONS 	TRUE / FALSE QUESTIONS 
1.	Awareness	22 	9 	29 	76 
2.	Concepts	37 	13 	28 	80 
3.	Framework	41 	14 	30 	85 
4.	Process	44 	21 	39 	102 
5.	Response	67 	28 	42 	118 
6.	Integration	47 	26 	43 	136 
7.	Strategy	46 	28 	54 	128 
8.	Alignment	44 	22 	61 	112 
9.	Operations	47 	27 	55 	106 
10.	Marketing	50 	28 	66 	109 
11.	HRM	74 	34 	80 	138 
12.	Financial	67 	30 	75 	132 
13.	Technology	66 	39 	93 	165 
The questions and answers included in this compendium cover the diagrams and tables included in Enterprise Risk Management, First Edition. However, they do not cover the boxes (sidebars) included within chapters, and do not  cover the Appendixes at the end of each chapter. 
Instructors should also note of the following: 
1)	The Review Questions and the Other Short Answer Questions complement one another, and do not overlap. They provide a comprehensive inventory of questions that require a short answer.
2)	The Multiple-Choice Questions and the True/False Questions cover the same topics as those covered in the Review Questions and the Other Short Answer Questions. They also overlap one another.
3)	Based on 1) and 2) instructors have the ability to test students on every topic covered in the textbook using questions that either require a short answer, a multiple-choice selection, or a true/false answer.
vi
Preface 	vii 
The proposed answers reflect ideal responses based on the contents of the textbook. Instructors should assess the quality of student answers in relation to the answers provided in this compendium. Students may explain things in their own words, which is completely acceptable provided that the meaning of their explanations is consistent with the proposed answers. Students may also provide only partial answers, which should be graded accordingly based on instructor judgment. 
Care has been taken to develop questions and answers based on the contents of Enterprise Risk Management, First Edition, and to cross-reference the answers to the textbook. However, we cannot guarantee that this Instructor Compendium of Questions and Answers is entirely free from possible errors. In cases of inconsistencies or differences between the textbook and this compendium (and other course materials such presentation slides), the content of the textbook should normally be given precedence. 
Noranda Education does not assume responsibility regarding whether the questions and answers included in this compendium may be too easy or too difficult for testing and examination purposes. Instructors are responsible for selecting and adapting the questions and answers based on their course delivery, and based on their higher education program requirements. Instructors may select from these questions, may enhance or modify these questions, or may ask different questions. Instructors assume full responsibility for using, enhancing, modifying, adapting or adding to these questions for student testing and examination purposes. 
Noranda Education welcomes instructor feed-back: 
•	Possible errors that need to be corrected.
•	How the questions and answers may be improved.
•	Additional questions and answers for consideration.
For questions, comments or feed-back, please do not hesitate to contact us. 
Noranda Education Inc. 
1730 St-Laurent Blvd., Suite 800 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1G 5L1 
Visit our website at www.NorandaEducation.com 
CHAPTER 1  
Risk Management Awareness 
Review Questions 
1.	Nature of risk
a)	Explain the nature of risk.   (p.4, p.50)
•	Risks are uncertainties that can affect organizational performance and results, including the achievement of goals, strategies and objectives.
•	Uncertainties are events that may occur, trends or conditions that may change, which may impact organizations positively or negatively.
•	Risks involve opportunities and threats.
•	Risks can have positive or negative effects.
•	Value is created by taking risks and managing risks effectively.
b)	Explain the difference between risk management and ERM.  (p.4-5)
•	Risk management involves a process to identify, analyze and prioritize risks, develop responses, and monitor and review results.
•	ERM is a discipline that provides an effective, structured and integrated approach for managing risks strategically and on an organization-wide basis.
•	The term “enterprise” refers to every type of organization. It means that risk management is applied to whatever activities an organization is “enterprising” for achieving its mandate.
c)	Why do organizations need to take risks?   (p.4)
Organizations that avoid taking risks cannot innovate, make strategic investments, upgrade their operational practices, adapt to change and remain competitive. Over time, they become obsolete, ineffective and costly to operate. They draw criticism from stakeholders, develop a negative reputation, and eventually fail or cease to operate.
d)	What external forces create risks?   (p.5-9)
External forces that create risks include the following:
•	Globalization - greater competition, complex strategies, investments
•	Human health - pandemics, communicable diseases, restrictions, lockdowns
•	Complexity - franchises, supply chains, outsourcing, partners
•	Science and technology trends - competitive edge for those taking charge
•	Economic cycles - monetary and fiscal policies, government debt, recessions
•	Social trends - sharing economy, changing attitudes, demographic trends
•	Environmental sustainability - pollution, global warming, carbon pricing
•	Accountability - regulatory oversight, public scrutiny, social media
•	Geopolitical tensions - ideologies, armed conflicts, trade sanctions, terrorism
e)	Outline three important risks identified in the ERM Initiative survey. (p.10-11) The following risks are reported in the ERM Initiative survey of 2020:
•	Regulatory changes and heightened regulatory scrutiny
•	Economic conditions that may restrict growth opportunities
•	Succession and the ability to attract and retain talent
•	Ability to adopt a digital mindset and develop related capabilities
•	Resistance to change that restricts business model and operational adjustments
 
•	Cyber threats disrupting operations 
•	Privacy and identity protection 
•	Culture that may not encourage the timely escalation of risks 
•	Customer loyalty and retention 
•	Adoption of digital technologies 
 
2. Evolution of risk management 
 
a)	What industries and professions influenced the evolution of risk management?   (p.12) 
Industries:  	Financial services, health sciences Professions: 	Accounting, internal audit 
 
b)	Briefly explain the nature of the influences of these industries and professions.   (p.12-13) 
Financial services industry - Banks and insurance companies analyze market conditions and price their products and services to cover their operating costs, absorb losses, and return an acceptable profit to investors. They quickly understood that a competitive advantage is gained by managing risks effectively. They apply risk control and risk financing techniques to manage risks. 
Health sciences industry - Health authorities developed frameworks and processes for managing health risks. The processes included in the frameworks are consistent with the guidance later developed for managing organizational risks. Health risk management frameworks were a source of inspiration for the evolution of risk management as a functional discipline. 
Accounting profession - The accounting profession provided through leadership in the areas of internal control and management control. The profession developed internal control frameworks that outline criteria that should be met to ensure organizational success. The frameworks evolved to a risk-based approach to focus controls on risks. Methodologies and tools were developed to identify and assess risks, which contributed to modern day risk management practices. 
Internal audit profession - The definition of internal auditing was updated for audits to examine the effectiveness of governance, risk management and control. Internal auditors are expected to examine the effectiveness of practices and controls aimed at managing risks. In addition, internal auditors conduct risk-based audit planning to identify audit priorities. When developing their audit plans, internal auditors conduct risk analyses to identify areas where internal audit projects should be conducted based on where risks are most significant. With such planning, internal auditors developed knowledge and skills in risk identification and assessment. In some cases, they were asked to lead or contribute to the implementation of ERM within organizations. 
 
c) Explain the difference between conventional and contemporary risk management.   (p.14-16) 
Conventional risk management →  Traditional risk management 	Contemporary risk management →  Enterprise risk management 
Purpose: 
•	Protect value Scope: 
•	Risks resulting in losses or liabilities • Risks associated with specific functions Focus: 
•	Threats (negative consequences) 
•	Known risks (predictable consequences) Approach: 
•	Siloed risk management 
•	No aggregation of risk information 
•	Priorities determined within functions 
•	Stand-alone responses to risk 
•	Inconsistent risk management practices 	Purpose: 
•	Protect and create value Scope: 
•	All risks that can affect performance 
•	Risks across the entire organization Focus: 
•	Opportunities and threats • Known risks and emerging risks Approach: 
•	Integrated risk management 
•	Comprehensive view of risks 
•	Priorities determined organization-wide 
•	Coordinated responses to risk 
•	Consistent risk management practices 
3. Landmark events and reforms 
 
a)	What landmark events and reforms impacted risk management?   (p.16-24) Accounting scandals - Enron, WorldCom, etc. 
•	Sarbanes Oxley Act - to prevent accounting fraud 
•	SEC and NYSE governance and financial reporting regulations and rules Financial crisis - Lehman Brothers, Bear Stearns, etc. 
•	Dodd Frank Act - to promote stability of the financial system 
•	SEC and NYSE risk management regulations and rules 
 
b)	Explain the SEC requirements for reporting risk information in annual reports.   (p.22) The SEC requires that companies publicly-traded in the United States report risk information in a separate section titled “risk factors” in their quarterly and annual reports. The information provides investors with an overview of the significant risks facing the organization.  The significant risks may be external or internal to the organization, and may be strategic, operational or financial in nature. The reports must also include distinct information on market risks.  
 
c)	What does Standard & Poor look for when assessing ERM practices in general?  (p.23) S&P updated its methodologies in 2005 to specifically assess the ERM practices of financial services organizations. In 2008, S&P began to assess the ERM practices of all other organizations using a different approach. The different approach for non-financial services organizations focusses on risk management culture, structures, policies, decisions and communications. For these organizations, S&P examines how the most significant risks are identified and assessed, and how these risks and the risk management activities affect strategic and financing decisions. 
 
4. Risk management guidance 
 
a)	Briefly describe the COSO ERM framework.   (p.25) 
The COSO ERM framework highlights the importance of considering risk in the context of strategy and performance. The framework emphasizes the need to identify and manage risks associated with strategies and related objectives, to achieve performance and create value.  
The framework is a set of twenty principles organized in five interrelated components:  1) governance and culture; 2) strategy and objective-setting; 3) performance; 4) review and revision; and 5) information, communication and reporting.  In the words of COSO, the principles of the framework “describe practices that can be applied in different ways for different organizations regardless of size, type, or sector.”  The framework is depicted as DNA strand, reflecting that ERM needs to be embedded in the fabric of an organization. 
 
b)	Briefly describe the ISO Risk Management guideline.   (p.25-26) 
The ISO guidelines outline eight principles that reflect the attributes (qualities or characteristics) of effective risk management. The guidelines also include a risk management framework that helps organizations develop and implement their own framework for risk management. In addition, the guidelines propose a risk management process that includes risk identification, analysis, evaluation, treatment and reporting. The process also suggests that communication, consultation, monitoring and review take place at all stages of the risk management process.  
The ISO guidelines advocate that risks should be identified based on the context of the organization, namely its external and internal environments. The guidelines maintain that risks involve both the positive and negative effects of uncertainties on objectives.  The guidelines provide a common approach for managing any type of risk, and can be applied to any kind of activity.  The guidelines also propose that risk management can be applied to an entire organization, as well as individually to specific areas, functions, activities, programs or projects. 
 
5. Organizational transformations 
 
a)	Why is there pressure on boards of directors to improve risk management?   (p.27-28) 
Organizational changes are caused by the growing volume, complexity and significance of risks. They are also caused by the increasing frequency and unpredictability of risks, and the speed and velocity at which risk events unfold.  Stakeholders have rising expectations regarding risk management. They have varying interests and place a great amount of pressure on boards of directors or their equivalent to exercise effective governance on all matters of risk management.  
The NACD states that there is an intense focus on risk, and that boards are operating in a challenging business environment. Boards are responsible for risk oversight: 
•	Ensure that risks assumed are consistent with the interests of shareholders / stakeholders 
•	Obtain reliable risk and risk management information from the organization 
•	Assess whether risks taken or tolerated are consistent with directions 
•	Ensure that organizational performance is acceptable in light of the risks assumed. 
 
b)	What industries tend to have a greater level of implementation of ERM and why?   (p.30) Implementation differences are largely driven by varying stakeholder expectations, regulations, resources and competitive pressures. As such, the adoption of formal risk management practices is highest in the industrial sectors of banking, insurance, public utilities, mining, and oil & gas.  By comparison, the adoption of formal risk management practices tends to be lowest in education, retail trade, transportation and manufacturing, where less than forty-five percent of respondents indicate that formal practices are in place. 
 
c)	What are the three transformative effects of ERM on organizations?   (p.31-33) Culture shifts, board risk oversight, and management structures. 
 
d)	Briefly describe one of the three transformative effects.   (p.31-33) Students may choose from the following: 
Culture shifts – organizations develop an understanding of risks and a risk management mindset that influences their strategies, structures, decisions, processes, activities, etc. Organizations focus on risks related to objectives, and develop integrated solutions for managing risks. ERM also causes organizations to clarify roles, responsibilities and accountabilities for risk management. 
Board risk oversight – boards undergo transformations to exercise their oversight responsibilities, including examining the qualifications of board members, allocating responsibilities to the full board and its committees, and determining how risk information should be reported to them. 
Management structures – Organizations develop and implement an ERM framework and process. A distinct ERM function is typically created for leadership, advice, coordination and oversight services. Responsibilities for managing risks are assigned to risk owners. Many organizations establish a risk management committee that supports the coordination of risk management, provides a forum to resolve issues, and facilitates risk management integration. 
 
6. Organizational transformations – Challenges encountered 
 
a)	What eight challenges are encountered by organizations implementing ERM?   (p.33-34) 
•	Executive support - executives need to understand the value proposition 
•	Cultural issues - need to allow sharing of risk information, open discussions 
•	Arguable motivations - regulatory compliance should not be the driving factor 
•	Administrative burden - complex structures, undue process, information overload 
•	Competing priorities - need for ongoing involvement, refinement, evolution, etc. 
•	Integration difficulties - all business units, strategic planning, decisions, performance mgmt 
•	Simplistic focus - known risks, limited focus on objectives, opportunities, disruptive trends 
•	Lack of expertise - knowledge and skills are difficult to find, need to recruit the right people 
b)	Briefly explain two of those challenges.   (p.33-34) Students may choose any two from the above. 
 
7. Benefits of ERM 
 
a)	What are the two most important benefits of ERM?  (p.35) 
The most important benefits of ERM are the ability of organizations to achieve a collective understanding of organizational risks and make better decisions. 
 
b)	Give five examples of outcomes that should be expected from ERM.  (p.35) Students may choose from the following: 
Process Outcomes: 
•	Risks are identified in relation to objectives. 
•	Risks are aggregated from all business units. 
•	Known and emerging risks are analyzed. 
•	Risks are analyzed using proven methods. 
•	Risks are prioritized using dependable criteria. 
•	Actions are taken to address significant risks. 
•	Risk management solutions are integrated. 
•	Risk management results are monitored. 	Framework Outcomes: 
•	There is consensus on the most important risks. 
•	Risks inform strategic planning and decision making. 
•	Risks are assumed in accordance with directions. 
•	Risk ownership and accountability are assigned. 
•	Performance is managed taking risks into account. 
•	Meaningful risk information is reported to stakeholders 
•	Risk management compliance requirements are met. 
•	Risk management protects and creates value. 
 
8. Limitations of ERM 
 
a) Explain the limitations of ERM.   (p.36) 
ERM it is not a substitute for ignorance, complacency, faulty judgment, reckless behavior or lack of ethics. These issues are highly problematic, especially if they are rampant at the senior executive level. The accounting scandals of 2001-02 and the financial crisis of 2007-08 provide many examples of organizational failures that would have been difficult to prevent even if ERM practices had been stronger. It is generally understood that ERM provides assurance, but not absolute assurance. ERM can only be as strong as the persons leading, supporting and participating in the effort. 
 
 
Other Short Answer Questions 
 
1.	Explain why every organization faces risks.   (p.4) 
Every organization has a purpose and faces uncertainties. Organizations adopt goals, strategies and objectives, and operate to achieve results. Events may occur or conditions may change that can affect performance and results. Such realities apply indiscriminately to every type of organization. 
 
2.	Explain how the context of an organization drives risk management.   (p.5) 
The context of an organization drives the type of risks that need to be managed, and the risk management practices that should be implemented. Organizations have very different types of risks, but they all need to manage risks (e.g. financial services, manufacturers, utilities, governments, etc.) 
 
3.	Explain why organizations have less control over external forces that create risks.   (p.5) Organizations have less control over external forces, because the uncertainties and effects that they create are more difficult to anticipate and manage. Organizations need to analyze the implications of external forces and determine how best to adapt to the opportunities and threats that they present. 
 
4.	What is the difference between internal control and management control?   (p.15) 
Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the achievement of objectives relating to operations, reporting and compliance. Management control is the structures, processes, approaches and methods that influence managers and employees to achieve organizational objectives. Internal control is part of (a component of) management control. 
5.	What are the purpose, scope, focus and approach of enterprise risk management?   (p.15) 
Enterprise risk management 
Purpose: 
•	Protect and create value Scope: 
•	All risks that can affect performance • Risks across the entire organization Focus: 
•	Opportunities and threats • Known risks and emerging risks Approach: 
•	Integrated risk management 
•	Comprehensive view of risks 
•	Priorities determined organization-wide 
•	Coordinated responses to risk 
•	Consistent risk management practices 
 
6.	Explain the sign-off and certification requirements of Sarbanes-Oxley.   (p.18) 
Financial reports and information - The chief executive officer and chief financial officer must certify (sign-off) that they have reviewed their company reports filed with the SEC, and that the reports are not misleading and present fairly the financial condition and results of operations of the organization. 
Financial reporting controls - The executives must certify that they are responsible for controls relating to financial reporting and disclosures, and that these controls have been evaluated.  They also need to attest that any fraud or significant deficiency has been disclosed to their financial statement auditors and audit committee. Auditors have to provide an opinion on financial reporting controls. 
 
7.	Explain the complaint and whistleblower protection requirements per Sarbanes-Oxley  (p.19) As part of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, audit committees must establish procedures for the receipt, retention and treatment of complaints regarding accounting, internal controls or auditing matters. The procedures need to allow these complaints to be made confidentially or anonymously. The procedures must also protect the complainants (referred to as whistleblowers), and any other persons providing information, from retaliation by management or other employees. 
 
8.	Explain why boards struggle to determine how to exercise risk oversight.   (p.32) 
As a general rule, risks should be discussed by the same group that is responsible for providing direction on organizational strategies, and for monitoring organizational performance. Such a group needs to provide direction on the risks to assume or tolerate for implementing strategies, achieving objectives, and meeting performance targets. These responsibilities evidently rest with the full board. 
Boards find it challenging to determine how to exercise their risk oversight responsibilities, while allocating responsibilities to board committees (to alleviate the work of the full board) and comply with regulatory requirements (applicable to audit committees and/or risk committees). 
 
9.	What is key to overcome the implementation challenges of ERM?   (p.34) 
It is clear that developing a solid understanding of ERM is the key to unlocking its potential. Knowledge builds confidence, and enables the design of solutions that are consistent with proven practices. These practices include maintaining a focus on goals, strategies and objectives, putting core organizational functions at the forefront, developing an approach that is practical and adapted to organizational needs, and designing effective mechanisms for risk management integration. 
 
 	 
Multiple Choice Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1) Risks are: 
a)	Uncertainties that can affect performance and results. 
b)	Events that can impede the achievement of objectives. 
c)	Opportunities and threats that only have negative effects. 
d)	Undesirable and should be eliminated to the best extent possible. 	a) 	p.4 
2) Risks apply: 
a)	Mostly to companies that seek to make profits. 
b)	Only to organizations that have a purpose to achieve. 
c)	To all organizations in general, irrespective of their purpose. 
d)	Only in the context of uncertainties creating losses or liabilities. 	c) 	p.4 
3) Organizations that avoid taking risks: 
a)	Cannot innovate and adapt to change. 
b)	Become obsolete, ineffective and costly to operate. 
c)	Draw criticism and eventually fail or cease to operate. 
d)	All of the above 
e)	None of the above 	d) 	p.4 
4) The type of risks that need to be managed is driven by: 
a)	The context of the organization. 
b)	Strategies and priorities set by senior management. 
c)	Stakeholder expectations regarding risk management. 
d)	The most significant risks previously identified. 	a) 	p.5 
5) The need for ERM structure and formality is driven by: 
a)	Management preferences for how risks should be managed. 
b)	Experience in managing risks that have previously taken place. 
c)	Organizational culture, size and complexity. 
d)	Government regulations imposed on the organization. 	c) 	p.5 
6) Organizations have less control over external forces that create risks because: 
a)	There is less information available about external forces that create risks. 
b)	The uncertainties of these forces are more difficult to anticipate and manage. 
c)	There is very little that can be done to mitigate the effects of external forces. d) All of the above 
e) None of the above 	b) 	p.5 
7) Global risk surveys help organizations: 
a)	Identify risks may have been overlooked. 
b)	Determine whether some risks may require more attention. 
c)	Better analyze their context and update risk information. 
d)	All of the above 
e)	None of the above 	d) 	p.9 
8) Risk management as a functional discipline mostly emerged from: 
a)	The financial services industry. 
b)	The health sciences industry. 
c)	The accounting profession. 
d)	The external auditing profession. 
e)	All of the above 
f)	None of the above 	a) 	p.12 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
9) The definition of internal auditing includes: 
a)	Risk-based audit planning to help identify priorities. 
b)	The assessment of management practices and controls to audit compliance. 
c)	The effectiveness of governance, risk management and control practices. 
d)	The need to consult management to determine internal audit priorities. 	c) 	p.13 
10) Internal control is: 
a)	A process that complements risk management for compliance objectives. 
b)	A process that provides reasonable assurance on the achievement of objectives. 
c)	A process that is used by management to control the work of employees. 
d)	A process that promotes a focus on the most significant risks. 	b) 	p.13 
11) The purpose of management control is: 
a)	To supervise of employees in order that they carry out their tasks effectively. 
b)	To influence managers and employees to achieve organizational objectives. 
c)	To provide reasonable assurance on the achievement of objectives. d) All of the above 
e) None of the above 	b) 	p.13 
12) Conventional risk management: 
a)	Considers risks as threats that should be eliminated as much as possible. 
b)	Focuses on risks that are undesirable and only result in a negative outcome. 
c)	Includes the management of risks that can affect productivity and technology d) All of the above 
e) None of the above 	d) 	p.14 
13) Contemporary risk management: 
a)	Focuses on risks that can result in a positive or negative outcome. 
b)	Focuses attention on risks relating to the achievement of objectives. 
c)	Facilitates the integration of risk management with strategic planning. d) All of the above 
e) None of the above 	d) 	p.15 
14) Contemporary risk management: 
a)	Considers risks as threats that should be eliminated as much as possible. 
b)	Focuses on risks that are undesirable and only result in a negative outcome. 
c)	Focuses attention on risks relating to the achievement of objectives. d) All of the above 
e) None of the above 	c) 	p.14-15 
15) Contemporary risk management: 
a)	Considers risks as threats that should be eliminated as much as possible. 
b)	Focuses on risks that are undesirable and only result in a negative outcome. 
c)	Includes the management of risks that can affect productivity and technology d) All of the above 
e) None of the above 	e) 	p.14-15 
16) Enterprise risk management: 
a)	Helps organizations manage risks consistently across functions and units. 
b)	Make informed decisions about risks that should be eliminated. 
c)	Consider the relationships and interdependencies of mitigation strategies. d) All of the above 
e) None of the above 	a) 	p.15 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
17) Enterprise risk management: 
a)	Helps organizations manage risks consistently across functions and units. 
b)	Make informed decisions about risk management priorities. 
c)	Consider the relationships and interdependencies of risks. 
d)	All of the above 
e)	None of the above 	d) 	p.15 
18) The Sarbanes-Oxley Act includes requirements for: 
a)	Contingency planning and stress testing of financial services organizations. 
b)	Review and approval of senior executive compensation by shareholders. 
c)	The certification of financial reports and financial reporting controls. d) All of the above 
e) None of the above 	c) 	p.18 
19) The Dodd-Frank Act includes requirements for: 
a)	The certification of financial reports and financial reporting controls. 
b)	The disclosure of off-balance sheet items in notes to financial statements. 
c)	Whistleblower rewards for the reporting of securities law violations. d) All of the above 
e) None of the above 	c) 	p.22 
20) The COSO ERM Framework: 
a)	Describes risk management practices relevant for large organizations. 
b)	Highlights the need to consider risks affecting strategy and performance. 
c)	Is a sub-component of the COSO Internal Control Framework. 
d)	Is mandatory for all companies publicly-traded in the United States. e) All of the above 
	f) 	None of the above 	b) 	p.25 
21) The ISO Risk Management Guidelines: 
a)	Advocate that risks should be identified based on organizational context. 
b)	Maintain that risks involve the effects of uncertainties on objectives. 
c)	Provide a common approach and process for all types of risk. 
d)	Can be applied for the entire organization as well as individual components. e) All of the above 
	f) 	None of the above 	e) 	p.25-26 
22) The adoption of ERM: 
a)	Varies significantly according to organizational size and industry. 
b)	Is generally more widespread in North America than in Europe. 
c)	Is higher in industries such as manufacturing, transportation and retail. 
d)	Is more relevant for organizations that are highly regulated. e) All of the above 
	f) 	None of the above 	a) 	p.29-30 
23) Formal risk management practices are more prevalent in: 
a)	Financial services, manufacturing and transportation 
b)	Financial services, public utilities, mining, and oil and gas 
c)	Public utilities, manufacturing, mining and transportation 
d)	Manufacturing, transportation and retail trade 
e)	Government entities and not-for profit organizations 	b) 	p.30 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
24) The transformative effects of ERM are mostly noticeable in the areas of: 
a)	Mission, vision, values and ethics 
b)	Goals, strategies, objectives and action plans 
c)	Culture, board risk oversight and management structures 
d)	Risk management coordination and integration 
e)	All of the above 
f)	None of the above 	c) 	p.31-33 
25) Many boards struggle to determine how to exercise risk oversight because: 
a)	There is not enough clarity about the role of audit committees. 
b)	It is difficult to decide how to allocate responsibilities to board committees. 
c)	Most board members have little knowledge or interest in risk management. 
d)	Risk management is not a board responsibility. 
e)	All of the above 
f)	None of the above 	b) 	p.32 
26) Challenges encountered with implementing ERM include: 
a)	Lack of executive support if ERM is not well understood 
b)	Cultural issues regarding the ability to discuss risks openly  
c)	Administrative burden due to undue process and information overload 
d)	Lack of expertise and challenges to recruit qualified individuals e) All of the above 
	f) 	None of the above 	e) 	p.34 
27) Process outcomes that should be achieved by implementing ERM include: 
a)	The identification of risks in relation to objectives. 
b)	A consensus on the most significant risks. 
c)	The assignment of risk ownership and accountability. 
d)	The management of performance taking risks into account. 
e)	The ability to meet risk management compliance requirements. f) 	All of the above 
g) None of the above 	a) 	p.35 
28) Process outcomes that should be achieved by implementing ERM include: 
a)	The identification of risks in relation to objectives. 
b)	The analysis of known and emerging risks. 
c)	The analysis of risks using proven methods. 
d)	Actions taken to address significant risks. 
e)	All of the above 
f)	None of the above 	e) 	p.35 
29) ERM has limitations because (select all that apply): 
a)	It is not a substitute for ignorance, complacency and faulty judgment. 
b)	Many difficult challenges are encountered with its implementation. 
c)	It only protects value, it does not create value. 
d)	It is only as strong as the persons leading, supporting and participating in it. 
e)	Its benefits cannot be measured easily and objectively. 	a), d) 	p.36 
 
 	 
True or False Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. A decision to establish an organization requires the acceptance of risk. 	True 	p.4 
2. Uncertainties do not apply indiscriminately to every type of organization.   	False 	p.4 
3. Organizations that avoid risks can still innovate and adapt to change. 	False 	p.4 
4. Excessive risk avoidance and reduction can be damaging. 	True 	p.4 
5. Every organization has similar risks that need to be managed. 	False 	p.5 
6. Risk management does not apply to government entities. 	False 	p.5 
7. ERM can be adapted to meet organizational needs for optimal results. 	True 	p.5 
8. The term “enterprise” mostly applies to companies in the private sector. 	False 	p.5 
9. Risk management cannot be optimal without structure and formality. 	True 	p.5 
10. Risk management applies to risk taking and risk reduction activities. 	True 	p.4 
11. Risks can have positive or negative outcomes. 	True 	p.4 
12. Risks may be desirable or undesirable, but they are mostly undesirable. 	False 	p.4 
13. Organizational priorities drive the types of risks that need to be managed. 	False 	p.5 
14. Organizational context drives the types of risks that need to be managed. 	True 	p.5 
15. Risks mostly originate from external sources. 	False 	p.5 
16. Organizations have less control over external forces that create risks. 	True 	p.5 
17. External forces that create risks are sometimes called disruptive trends. 	True 	p.5 
18. Employee engagement is an external force affecting organizations. 	False 	p.5 
19. Global risk surveys help organizations identify and manage risks. 	True 	p.9 
20. The global risk landscape refers to external and internal forces that create risks. 	False 	p.11 
21. Risk management as a functional discipline mostly emerged from auditing. 	False 	p.12 
22. Health sciences had a noticeable impact on risk management. 	True 	p.12 
23. Internal controls are only relevant for financial reporting and compliance risks. 	False 	p.13 
24. Management control influences managers and employees to achieve objectives. 	True 	p.13 
25. Internal auditing focuses on governance, risk management and control. 	True 	p.13 
26. Operational efficiency is part of conventional and contemporary risk management. 	True 	p.13 
27. Conventional risk management and enterprise risk management similar. 	False 	p.14 
28. Conventional risk management is focused on the achievement of objectives. 	False 	p.14 
29. Traditional risk management does not have direct linkages with strategic planning. 	True 	p.14 
30. Traditional risk management focuses on risks that are desirable and undesirable. 	False 	p.14 
31. Contemporary risk management focuses attention on what is to be achieved. 	True 	p.14 
32. Strategic risks are the main causes of declines in the market value of firms. 	True 	p.15 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
33. Financial risks are the main causes of declines in the market value of firms. 	False 	p.15 
34. ERM enables risk information to be presented for the organization as a whole,  and separately for each management function and business unit. 	True 	p.16 
35. ERM is a complex discipline that is relatively new and continues to evolve. 	True 	p.16 
36. ERM is generally well understood by senior executives and middle managers. 	False 	p.16 
37. The transition from conventional to contemporary risk management requires a shift of culture and mindset that is generally well understood by senior executives. 	False 	p.16 
38. The transition from conventional to contemporary risk management requires a shift of culture and mindset that is not very well understood by senior executives. 	True 	p.16 
39. The financial crisis of 2008-09 led to the Sarbanes Oxley Act. 	False 	p.16 
40. The accounting scandals of 2001-02 led to the Dodd Frank Act. 	False 	p.16 
41. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act requires financial reporting and control certifications. 	True 	p.18 
42. The Dodd-Frank Act includes compensation recovery rules. 	True 	p.22 
43. Risk management weaknesses did not directly contribute to the financial crisis.  	False 	p.20 
44. The Dodd-Frank Act only applies to financial services organizations. 	False 	p.21 
45. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requires the disclosure of risk management practices, including how oversight responsibilities are assumed. 	True 	p.22 
46. The COSO ERM Framework emphasizes the need to identify and manage risks associated with strategies and related objectives to achieve better performance. 	True 	p.25 
47. The ISO Risk Management Guidelines provide a common approach and process that can be applied for the entire organization as well as individual components. 	True 	p.26 
48. The COSO ERM framework is better suited for large organizations. 	False 	p.25 
49. The ISO Risk Management Guidelines focus mostly on strategy and performance. 	False 	p.26 
50. The ISO Risk Management Guidelines are not applicable in the United States. 	False 	p.25 
51. All organizations have a board, council or person to whom they are accountable. 	True 	p.28 
52. Board members are responsible for managing risks in accordance with directions. 	False 	p.28-29 
53. Board members are responsible for risk management directions and oversight. 	True 	p.28-29 
54. Regulations are the main driver for the adoption of ERM practices. 	False 	p.29 
55. ERM adoption varies significantly according to organizational size and industry. 	True 	p.29 
56. More than 90% of large organizations have implemented ERM at least partially. 	True 	p.30 
57. Formal risk management practices are most prevalent in the manufacturing sector. 	False 	p.30 
58. Shifts in culture are the most significant organizational change caused by ERM. 	True 	p.31 
59. Management decides how risk information should be reported to board members. 	False 	p.32 
60. At the board level, risks should be discussed by the same group that is responsible for providing direction on strategies and for monitoring organizational performance. 	True 	p.32 
61. Risk oversight responsibilities should be assumed by the full board of directors. 	True 	p.32 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
62. The main responsibility of ERM functions is to manage risks centrally. 	False 	p.33 
63. The main responsibility of ERM functions is to ensure that risk management gets done. 	True 	p.33 
64. Risk owners are responsible for managing specific risks assigned to them. 	True 	p.33 
65. The assignment of risk ownership is essential for effective risk management. 	True 	p.33 
66. Developing a solid understanding of ERM is key to unlocking its potential. 	True 	p.34 
67. Limited value can be expected if ERM is implemented for regulatory compliance. 	True 	p.34 
68. ERM does not require ongoing involvement and refinement after it is implemented. 	False 	p.34 
69. ERM should focus mostly on known risks in order to add value. 	False 	p.34 
70. The success of ERM is contingent upon the quality of the individuals leading the effort. 	True 	p.34 
71. The most important benefits of ERM are the avoidance of losses and liabilities. 	False 	p.35 
72. The most important benefits of ERM are to achieve a collective understanding of organizational risks and to make better decisions as a result. 	True 	p.35 
73. The value of ERM can be measured objectively and without significant challenges. 	False 	p.34 
74. It has been proven that there is a direct correlation between advanced risk management and the superior stock market performance of publicly-traded companies. 	True 	p.34 
75. The limitations of ERM are caused by deficient management frameworks. 	False 	p.36 
76. The limitations of ERM are mainly caused by problematic human behaviors. 	True 	p.36 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2  
Risk Management Concepts 
 
 
Review Questions 
 
1. Definitions of risk 
 
a)	What are the differences between the ISO and COSO definitions of risk?   (p.49-50) 
ISO - Risk is the effect of uncertainty on objectives. 
•	Refers to uncertainties in general. 
•	Does not clarify: effect of uncertainty on the [achievement of] objectives 
•	Refers to objectives very broadly as the outcomes that are sought. 
•	Scope includes all types of objectives - strategic, operational, financial, etc. 
COSO - Risk is the possibility that events will occur and affect the achievement  of strategy and business objectives.  
•	Refers to uncertainty as the possibility that events will occur 
•	Refers to the achievement of strategy and “business objectives.” 
•	Scope includes “business objectives” - steps taken to achieve strategy per COSO. 
•	Scope excludes operational objectives - objectives not directly related to strategy. 
 
b)	What are the characteristics of a good definition of risk?   (p.50-51) 
•	Clear, easy to remember, resonate well with the organization 
•	Consistent with guidelines and established practices 
•	Leave no doubt regarding the nature of risk and importance of managing risks 
•	Incorporate the notion of risk and reward 
•	Incorporate the imperatives of performance and results 
•	Refer to what the organization is trying to achieve 
•	Incorporate the notion that risks can have positive or negative effects 
 
c)	Outline the proposed definitions of risk and uncertainty.   (p.50) 
Risks are uncertainties that can affect organizational performance and results, including the achievement of goals, strategies and objectives. 
Uncertainties are events that may occur, trends or conditions that may change, which can impact organizations positively or negatively. 
 
d)	Explain why the proposed definitions are useful.   (p.51) 
The first definition links the notion of risk with performance and objectives, which is highly desirable given the importance of integrating risk management with strategic planning and performance management, and the difficulties involved with trying to do so. The second definition outlines how risks originate, and the positive and negative aspects of risks. But most importantly, these definitions are relatively easy to understand and remember, and they leave no doubt on the importance of managing risks. 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Components of risk 
 
a)	Explain the components of risk and illustrate them with an example.  (p.51) 
Origin
 
What might cause the risk
to happen?
 
Causes	Where can the risk 
originate?
 
Sources		Uncertainty	Outcome
 
What uncertainties What are the may occur that can direct effects  
	affect the organization?	of the risk?
 
Events, trends or changes 	Effects in condition that can have a positive or negative outcome	 
What are the resulting
consequences of the risk?
 
Consequences	
Event Example:
Maintenance schedule not 
implemented or ineffective	Machinery breakdown	Interruption of production at a manufacturing plant	Delayed shipments,
cancelled orders, upset customers	Lower revenues, lower profits, 
and damaged reputation	
Trend / Change 
Online strategy not effective or 
not pursued aggressively	in Condition Exa
The Internet being a virtual retail space 
that facilitates competition	mple:
Growing tendency of consumers to buy 
goods online, thereby negatively impacting a traditional retailer with store locations	Greater competition, 
lower consumer 
prices, and lower 
sales volumes in retail stores	Lower growth of revenues, 
lower profits, and fading brand image	
 
b)	Describe the scalability of risk information in the context of uncertainties, sources of risk and causes of risk. Also explain how scalability should be used.   (p.53) 
The scalability of risk information has to do with the levelling of uncertainties, sources of risk and causes, which may be different across organizations. Scalability should be applied based on how an organization wants to define and monitor risks. 
For example, an organization might want to monitor the risk of production interruptions as a whole (one uncertainty), while another might prefer to monitor failures of machinery, equipment and power systems individually (three separate uncertainties). By contrast, another organization might prefer to manage the risk of not meeting production plans as a whole, and consider all sources of risks within this broadly defined uncertainty. The following table illustrates: 
Components 	Organization A 	Organization B 
Uncertainty 	Production interruptions 	Not meeting production plan 
Sources of risk 	Failure of machinery 
Failure of equipment 
Failure of power systems 	Production interruptions Supply chain issues 
Causes 	Lack of proper maintenance 
Back-up generator not working 	Failure of machinery 
Failure of equipment 
Failure of power systems 
Late delivery of supplies 
Defective supplies 
 
c)	Explain how threats and opportunities may be opposite sides of the same coin.   (p.53) Risks are opportunities and threats. They are often opposite sides of the same coin, simply based on organizational context and perceptions. What may present a threat to an organization may constitute an opportunity for another.  For example, the growing tendency of consumers to buy goods online may be perceived as a threat by a traditional retailer with many store locations. However, the same risk is an opportunity for a new retailer to establish itself, by developing a solid web presence and avoiding major investments to open retail stores in prime locations.  
 
3. Risk statements 
 
a)	What are the attributes of good risk statements?  (p.54) 
•	Summary description of a risk that follows a consistent format. 
•	Normally limited to one sentence. 
•	Explains the risk in a clear, concise and meaningful manner. 
•	Ensures that the risk is understood the same way by everyone 
•	Reflects organizational context and how performance and results may be affected. 
•	Simple language that is easy for everyone to understand. 
•	Each risk statement should be self-explanatory. 
•	Should not confuse uncertainties with causes (e.g. deficient management practices). 
•	Should be limited to risks that are of critical importance to organizational success. 
 
b)	Explain how risk statements should be developed.   (p.54) 
•	Should be developed in relation to uncertainties and their direct effects.  
•	Based on how an organization wants to define and manage uncertainties. 
•	The risk of [state the uncertainty], resulting in [outline the direct effects]. 
•	Examples: 
o	The risk of production interruptions, resulting in delayed shipments, cancelled orders and upset customers. 
o	The risk of consumers buying more goods online, resulting in greater competition, lower prices and lower sales volumes in retail stores. 
 
4. Categories of risk 
 
a)	What are the types of categories that can be used for risk analysis and reporting?  (p.55) External, internal, knowledge, desirability, objectives, function, level, consequence 
 
b)	Provide examples of categories within each type.  (p.55) 
Types 	Categories 
External 	Economic, Political, Legal, Social, Technological, Natural Environment, etc. 
Internal 	Policy, Process, People, Management, Information, Technology, etc. 
Knowledge 	Known, Emerging, Unknown (Identifiable, Unforeseeable) 
Desirability 	Desirable / Rewarded / Opportunity;  Undesirable / Unrewarded / Threat 
Objectives 	Strategic, Operational, Financial, Compliance, Reporting 
Function 	Governance, Corporate, Engineering, Production, Sales, Distribution, etc. 
Level 	Whole Entity, Division, Business Line, Activity, Process, Project, etc. 
Consequence 	Growth, Profitability, Reputation, Health and Safety, Asset Protection, etc. 
 
 
5. Categories of risk – Emerging and unknown risks 
 
a)	What are the differences between emerging risks and unknown risks?  (p.55-56) 
Emerging risks are trends or changing conditions that become disruptive over time. They have effects that are less obvious (than known risks), and they are not expected to have significant implications in the short term. Emerging risks are new to organizations, and their transformative effects are usually difficult to predict, especially in the beginning (e.g. shift toward organic food). Unknown risks are even less familiar or predictable (than emerging risks). In some cases they are identifiable but with consequences that are difficult to imagine (e.g. artificial intelligence). 
 
b)	Is there more than one kind of unknown risk?   (p.56) 
Unknown but identifiable - risks that are identifiable with consequences difficult to imagine Also called known unknowns - knowing the risk but not understanding its implications e.g. artificial intelligence, three dimensional printing, negative interest rates 
Unknown and unforeseeable - risks that are unthinkable (not identified and not anticipated) Also called unknown unknowns - unaware that an unfamiliar risk exists e.g. terrorism acts of September 2001, financial crisis of 2008-09 
 
6. Categories of risk – Desirable and undesirable risks 
 
a)	What are desirable and undesirable risks?   (p.56) 
•	Desirable risks offer a possibility of reward or value creation when assumed. They can be exploited or seized to achieve a goal, strategy or objective. They have an upside potential but are said to be double-sided because they may result in a positive or a negative outcome. 
•	Undesirable risks are those that do not provide a chance for reward or value creation. They are risks that should be mitigated to avoid a potential loss or negative effect. Undesirable risks only have a possibility of downside and are said to be one-sided because they can only result in a negative outcome if they occur.   
 
b)	Provide two examples of desirable risks.   (p.56) 
Examples of desirable risks include entering new markets and acquiring new technologies.  
 
c)	Provide two examples of undesirable risks.   (p.56) 
Examples include non-compliance to regulations, fraud, theft, accidents and acts of nature such as lightning, forest fires, earthquakes, excessive rainfall causing flooding, etc. 
 
7. Categories of risk – Consequences 
 
a)	What are the consequence categories for risk classification?   (p.58) 
Consequence categories are the ones traceable to the components of risks. They include growth, profitability, reputation, health and safety, asset protection, resilience and sustainability. In the context of government entities, growth and profitability are substituted for program relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and economy.  
 
b)	What are the benefits of categorizing risks according to consequences?   (p.58) 
Categorizing risks in relation to consequences helps organizations aggregate all risks that may affect growth, profitability, reputation, etc. The aggregation provides a holistic view of how many risks impact the organization in similar ways, and enables the design and implementation of integrated solutions. For example, if many significant risks impact reputation, the organization may conclude that it has too much exposure regarding events or conditions that can damage its reputation. The organization can develop an integrated response to address such an exposure. 
 
8. Characteristics of risk 
 
a)	Explain inherent and residual risk.   (p.62) 
Inherent and residual risks are concepts that distinguish the levels of risk that exist before and after risk management actions and controls are applied. 
•	Inherent risk is the risk that is intrinsic to an activity or asset. It is the level of risk that exists in the absence of any action or control that alters the impact or likelihood of the risk. 
•	Residual risk is the level of risk that remains after risk management actions and controls are applied.  The difference between inherent and residual risk reflects the effectiveness of the risk management actions and controls. 
 
b)	Explain how risks can have cascading and compounding effects.   (p.63) 
When a risk event occurs, or when a trend or changing condition begins to impact an organization, the risk often has multiple effects and consequences. Some effects occur simultaneously and many others can happen in sequence (cascading). The effects also aggregate (compound) and may result in much greater consequences and outcomes than anticipated. 
 
9. Risk assessment – Residual and inherent risks 
 
a)	Explain the nature and advantages of residual risk assessment.   (p.64) 
Risk assessment is normally performed on the risk statement, namely the uncertainty and its effects as stated, and taking into account all of the risk information available. The resulting assessment is for residual risk because mitigating factors, risk management actions and controls are considered. The assessment of residual risk is useful for determining if the level of risk that remains is acceptable, or whether additional risk management actions and controls are needed. 
 
b)	Explain the nature and advantages of inherent risk assessment.   (p.64) 
Some organizations perform a separate assessment of inherent risk to determine what should be the main focus areas for risk management. The assessment of inherent risk provides an indication of where risks are more likely to materialize in the absence of risk management actions and controls. In addition, the assessment of inherent risk can be compared with the assessment of residual risk to determine the effectiveness of the risk management actions and controls. 
 
c)	Is it preferable to assess residual risk or inherent risk?   (p.64) 
Some experts note that the assessment of inherent risk is a worthwhile exercise provided that the individuals doing the assessment have a clear understanding of the difference between inherent and residual risk.  Other experts consider that it is preferable to focus exclusively on residual risk because the concept of inherent risk has limited practical meaning for most managers, and the credibility of the risk assessment process may be affected as a result (i.e. managers find it difficult to overlook / ignore the risk management actions and controls in place).  
In practice, most organizations assess residual risk and do not perform an assessment of inherent risk. Organizations consider inherent risk mostly as part of strategic risks. It can be argued that the risks singled out for residual risk assessment are normally all inherently significant. 
 
10. Risk assessment – Impact and likelihood 
 
a)	What do impact and likelihood measure?  (p.65) 
Impact measures the overall outcome of the effects and consequences that a risk is expected to have if it occurs. Likelihood measures the possibility that a risk may occur, typically using a probability or frequency. Conceptually, the combination of impact and likelihood reflects the expected value of a risk. 
 
b)	Why is it important to define rating scales for risk assessments?   (p.67) 
Risk assessments are normally performed by more than one person, either in a group setting or through a survey. The individuals performing a risk assessment or looking at the assessment results need a common understanding of what the assessment scales really mean. For everyone to apply the scales consistently, it is necessary to define the meaning of the descriptors for impact (consequences) and for likelihood (probabilities or frequencies).  
 
c)	Describe how the impact and likelihood rating scales should be defined.   (p.67-68) 
The impact scale should be defined across the range of consequences that the various risks can result in.  Most organizations define their impact scale across consequences having to do with revenue growth, profitability, reputation, and health and safety. Additional types of consequences are also used depending on the nature of an organization and its industry. 
Likelihood scales are normally defined using probabilities and/or frequencies applicable to a time period that is typically either a one year period or their planning period (e.g. 5 year plan). Depending on the nature of the risks that need to be assessed, both a probability and frequency can be defined for each point of the likelihood scale. Organizations must ensure that the definitions of probability and frequency are consistent with each other and the time period. 
 
d)	What are the different methods for displaying risk assessments?   (p.70) 
Risk assessment results can be presented in a matrix (box or curve matrix) or in a table format. Two dimensional matrixes are the most common approach to illustrate the significance of risk based on where the assessments of impact and likelihood intersect. These matrixes are called risk maps. When they involve color coding, they are also called heat maps. 
 
11. Risk culture 
 
a)	Briefly explain the concepts of risk culture, risk awareness and risk attitude.   (p.72-74) 
Risk culture can be defined as “the norms and traditions of behavior of individuals and groups within an organization, that determine the way in which they identify, understand, discuss, and act on the risks the organization confronts and the risks it takes.” Risk culture is reflected by the choices that an organization makes in the face of opportunities and threats, and the way that it pursues its mission by taking risks and managing risks. 
Risk awareness is the extent to which an organization is knowledgeable about its risks and risk management practices. Organizations that have little awareness are considered risk naïve. By contrast, organizations that achieve a high level of awareness are said to be risk aware. 
Risk attitude: 
•	The tendency of an organization to seek or avoid risks, more or less aggressively or passively. 
•	Approach of the organization to assess and pursue, retain, take or turn away from risk. (ISO) 
•	The risk management philosophy of an organization, which is reflected in the way that risks are considered in the development and execution of strategies, and the way that risks are managed in day-to-day operations. (COSO) 
•	The view or perspective that organizations have regarding the value that may be gained or lost through risk. (RIMS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b)	Outline the risk attitude matrix.   (p.74) 
	Risk Avoiding	Risk Seeking

Aggressive-avoiding organizations are averse to risk and mostly seek to minimize or avoid risk altogether. 
They adopt change very cautiously. They conserve and protect.
Ex.: Most government entities	Aggressive-seeking organizations are assertive with their risk taking and like to challenge the status quo.
They embrace change in earnest. They assume and disrupt. Ex.: Apple, Amazon, Uber
Passive-avoiding organizations are guarded and prefer the status quo. They are willing to take risks, but usually wait for a clear imperative. They maintain and progress.
Ex.: Coca-Cola, Wal-Mart, GM	Passive-seeking organizations are analytical and discerning about risk taking. They continuously take risks, but they do so at a measured pace. They advance and transform.
Ex.: General Electric, 3M, IBM

Risk
Aggressive
Risk
Passive
 
c)	Provide one example organization in each quadrant of the matrix. See above. 
 
12. Risk appetite 
 
a)	What is risk appetite?   (p.75) 
Risk appetite states the eagerness that an organization has toward risk. It is the type and amount of risk that an organization wants to pursue or assume. Accordingly, risk appetite is the level of risk that is considered desirable. 
 
b)	How is risk appetite influenced by risk capacity and capability?   (p.77) 
Risk capacity and capability equally affect the risk appetite of organizations. 
•	Risk capacity - Every organization has limitations regarding the amount of risk that it can assume without endangering its existence. Risk capacity is the maximum amount of risk that an organization is able to absorb. It is the amount of investment that an organization can afford to make, or the amount of income reduction or loss that it can sustain while remaining a going concern. It is an upper limit of risk that should not be exceeded. 
•	Risk capability - Organizations are also limited in their ability to assume risk based on their knowledge and experience. Risk capability refers to the know-how that an organization has about the risks that it wants to pursue or assume. It is based on the knowledge and experience acquired in taking and managing risks. It is also conditioned by the amount of risk management expertise of the organization in general. It is a level of risk management ability. 
 
c)	What are the methods that organizations can use for defining risk appetite?   (p.78-80) Broad methods: 
•	Adopting a general statement of risk appetite 
•	Defining risk appetite using risk maps. 
•	Defining risk appetite for categories of risk. 
•	Defining risk appetite [statements] for opportunities. Other methods - indirect (bonus points): 
•	Communicate risk appetite through policies and decisions. 
•	Communicate risk appetite through business plans, budgets, business cases, etc. 
Other methods - quantitative targets (bonus points): 
•	Risk appetite amount, range, ceiling or floor. 
13. Risk tolerance 
 
a)	Describe how risk tolerance is different from risk appetite.   (p.80-81) 
Risk appetite is the type and amount of risk that an organization wants to pursue or assume. It signals a desirable risk and a target level of risk. By comparison, risk tolerance is the level of risk that an organization is willing and prepared to accept,  which can differ from its risk appetite.  
Risk tolerance therefore indicates the levels of risk and variations that are acceptable in relation to risk appetite. It is the comfort zone where risks are tolerable. It is typically indicated as a margin that is above and/or below the risk appetite. It can be expressed as a percentage or factor of the risk appetite, however it is usually articulated using the same units that define risk appetite.   
 
b)	Illustrate risk appetite, risk tolerance and risk capacity using a diagram.   (p.81) 
Risk capacity limit
Risk appetite amount 	Tolerance	Risk appetite range	Tolerance	Risk appetite ceiling
 		Risk appetite  floor	Tolerance	
	limit		 				limit	
					Tolerance			
	Tolerance							
								
	limit		limit		limit			
Risk appetite may be stated as a target amount, range,Risk Capacity ceiling or floor. In turn, risk tolerance is usually defined asRisk Appetite a range that is above and/or below the risk appetite target.Risk Tolerance
 
14. Risk-reward relationships 
 
a)	Explain and illustrate the risk-reward relationship.   (p.82) 
Risk-reward relationships correlate the behavior of rewards in relation to risks. They are often illustrated using a normal curve. If an organization does not pursue or assume enough risk, or spends too much resources mitigating risk, it will not optimize value creation and may even cause value destruction. Alternatively, if an organization pursues or assumes too much risk, or does not sufficiently mitigate risk, it will have similar results. To achieve optimal value creation, organizations must find the right balance between avoiding risks and seeking risks. They need to do so for individual risks, and for all of their risks on an integrated basis. 
 
b)	Explain risk reward relationship management using a diagram.   (p.83) 
Organizations manage risk-reward relationships to improve performance and achieve better results. In some cases, they determine that risk capacity and risk appetite should increase.  
In other cases, they revise their strategies to stimulate or drive-up risk-reward relationships. Some organizations are able to create new relationships altogether. 
 
 
 
 
Other Short Answer Questions 
 
1.	Explain why there is no risk if there is absolute certainty.   (p.48) 
Conceptually, there is no risk if there is absolute certainty. Such circumstances involve entirely predictable issues or challenges that can be addressed with well adapted solutions. In such cases, there are in fact no risks to manage, just issues or challenges to address, and solutions to implement. 
 
2.	Explain why it is important to clarify the meaning of “events” in a definition of risk.   (p.49) In many situations, uncertainties are caused by trends or conditions that change over time, making it difficult to discern any specific event. For example, the emergence of the Internet is an evolution that continues to have major transformative effects. Accordingly, organizations that define risk in relation to events should clarify that they include trends or conditions that change over time. 
 
3.	Explain what is an event in the context of risk.   (p.52) 
An event is typically defined as an occurrence, an incident or a change of circumstances. Events may consist of something happening or not happening. They may be more or less predictable, or virtually impossible to anticipate. Events may have multiple effects, cascading (domino) effects, and compounding effects, all of which may result in different types of outcomes. Events may occur naturally or be induced by human activity, including decisions, actions or omissions. 
 
4.	Explain why deficient management practices should not be confused as risks.   (p.54) Organizations need to ensure that uncertainties are not confused with causes. For example, not having an effective maintenance plan for machinery, or not having a strategy for developing an online presence are not risks. They are deficient management practices that are causing risks to occur. Organizations that define risks based on deficient management practices are said to be issues driven, or to have a compliance-based approach to risk management. They are often not strategically focused on managing broad uncertainties that are critical to organizational success. 
5.	Explain the purpose of a risk statement.   (p.54) 
The main purpose of a risk statement is to explain a risk in a clear, concise and meaningful manner. The statement ensures that the risk is understood the same way by everyone, and that it can be assessed in a coherent manner. The use of a consistent format is essential to simplify the description of each risk, and to facilitate the comparison between risks. 
 
6.	Explain the difference between pure risks and speculative risks.   (p.56) 
The insurance industry refers to desirable risks as speculative risks or business risks because they involve the possibility of a gain. By contrast, the industry defines undesirable risks as pure risks because they only involve the possibility of a loss or no loss (depending on whether the risk occurs and how it is mitigated). Most pure risks are insurable. 
 
7.	Explain the difference between strategic, operational and financial risks.  (p.57) 
•	Strategic risks - are associated with the soundness and implementation of strategies. They include disruptive trends and technologies that make business models obsolete.   
•	Operational risks  - are those that impair the ability to function effectively and achieve a level of performance normally be expected.  They are risks related to governance, management structures, processes, computer systems and infrastructure. Operational risks also include hazards.   
•	Financial risks - relate to financial markets such as currency exchange and commodity prices, and risks associated with financing activities and financial transactions. 
 
8.	What are compliance risks?  (p.57) 
Compliance risks have to do with policy, legal, and regulatory requirements. 
 
9.	Explain why tier classification is useful.  (p.59) 
Tier classification is often used to differentiate risks that require attention by senior executives and board members, from those that can be handled at the operational level within business units or management functions. Tier classification is also used to differentiate known risks that are significant, emerging risks that have important implications, and other risks not significant or not emerging. 
 
10.	Explain what is a risk model and a risk taxonomy.   (p.59) 
A custom list of risk categories and sub-categories is commonly referred to as a risk model when it is presented in a diagram format. A risk model is also known as a risk taxonomy, which refers to a set of defined risk categories used for classification.  
 
11.	What is the trade-off of using detailed risk assessment scales and definitions?   (p.68) 
As a general rule, the more descriptive are the scales and definitions, the more they will be applied consistently by those doing the risk assessments. However, too much detail or complexity can cause confusion and frustrate the risk assessment process. A balance needs to be maintained between keeping the scales and definitions simple yet meaningful.  There is limited benefit to adding complexity unless it can better inform risk management decisions. 
 
12.	Does every organization have a risk appetite?  Explain.   (p.75-76) 
Every organization has a risk appetite, which is implicitly reflected by the way that risks are taken. However, many organizations are not at ease with trying to articulate and communicate their risk appetite, either for competitive reasons or simply because many risks are not easy to quantify. Often times the benefits of defining risk appetite are not well understood, and the approach for articulating risk appetite is unknown or perceived to be too challenging. When risk appetite is not clearly defined, it tends to be applied on an ad hoc basis depending on the issues that surface. 
 
 
 
 
13.	What are the characteristics of an effective risk appetite statement?   (p.78, p.76) 
Characteristics of an effective risk appetite statement per NACD  (correct answer) 
•	Clearly states the type and amount of risk that the organization wants to take. 
•	Specifies the amount of risk using qualitative and quantitative descriptors. 
•	Is actionable by management and have a real effect on strategy and risk taking. 
Benefits of a clear risk appetite statement  (students may confuse benefits with characteristics) 
•	Creates a common understanding of desirable risks. 
•	Guides risk decisions and the allocation of resources. 
•	Links risk taking to value creation strategies and activities. 
•	Provides a basis for ensuring that risk levels are adequate. 
 
 
Multiple Choice Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1) ISO defines risk as follows: 
a)	The effect of uncertainty on objectives. 
b)	The possibility that events will occur and affect the achievement of objectives. 
c)	Uncertainty about outcomes that can be either negative or positive. 
d)	An uncertain outcome that can either improve or worsen an organization’s position. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.49 
2) The COSO definition of risk: 
a)	Incorporates all types of objectives such as strategic, operational and financial. 
b)	Mentions that risk is measured in terms of impact and likelihood. 
c)	Refers to business objectives, namely those that improve performance and results. 
d)	Refers to business objectives, namely measurable steps taken to achieve strategy. 
e)	Mentions that risks can have outcomes that are either negative or positive. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.49 
3) A definition of risk should (select all that apply): 
a)	Be clear, easy to remember and resonate well across the organization. 
b)	Be consistent with government regulations applicable to risk management. 
c)	Reflect the nature of risk and why it is important to manage risks. 
d)	Reflect that risks should be identified in relation to events and outcomes. 
e)	Emphasize the need for risk management integration. 	a) 
c) 	p.50 
4) Uncertainties are: 
a)	Events that may result in negative effects on performance and outcomes. 
b)	Events, trends or changes in condition that may have positive or negative effects. 
c)	Causes and sources of risk that may affect the achievement of objectives. 
d)	Non existent if there is information, knowledge and experience dealing with risk. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.50 
5) The five components of risk are (select the best answer): 
a)	Causes, Sources, Uncertainties, Effects and Consequences 
b)	Causes, Sources, Effects, Consequences and Outcomes 
c)	Causes, Events, Trends, Effects and Consequences 
d)	Events, Trends, Changes in Conditions, Effects and Outcomes 
e)	Events, Trends, Changes in Conditions, Uncertainties and Results 	a) 	p.51 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
6) Differentiating between direct effects and resulting consequences is useful because: 
a)	They are both separate components of outcomes. 
b)	The differentiation helps identify causes and make decisions. 
c)	Effects are easier to measure objectively and manage effectively. 
d)	Consequences are the same for every type of organization. 
e)	All of the above 
f)	None of the above 	b) 	p.52 
7) The scalability of risk information means that: 
a)	Risk information is more or less detailed based on reporting requirements. 
b)	Some organizations consider all sources of risk, while others do not. 
c)	Risk information can be tailored based on organizational needs and preferences. 
d)	Some organizations want to prevent risks more actively than others. 
e)	Some organizations have a better understanding of risk components. 	c) 	p.53 
8) A risk statements is:  (select all that apply) 
a)	A summary description of a risk that follows a consistent format. 
b)	A sentence that defines a risk based on its potential outcomes. 
c)	The explanation of a risk in a clear, concise and meaningful manner. 
d)	The amount of risk that an organization is prepared to accept. 
e)	An uncertainty that may or may not be critical to organizational success. 	a) 
c) 	p.54 
9) The main purpose of a risk statement is to: 
a)	Explain a risk in a clear, concise and meaningful manner. 
b)	Ensure that a risk is understood the same way by everyone. 
c)	Ensure that a risk can be assessed in a coherent manner. 
d)	Facilitate the comparison between risks. 
e)	All of the above 
f)	None of the above 	a) 	p.54 
10) Risk categories are: 
a)	Descriptors that explain different aspects of risks. 
b)	Useful to group and analyze vast amounts of risk information. 
c)	Helpful to describe and group risks into meaningful blocks. d) All of the above 
e) None of the above 	d) 	p.54 
11) An emerging risk is: 
a)	A risk that is not well understood but is easy to anticipate and predict. 
b)	A trend or a changing condition that becomes disruptive over time. 
c)	A risk that is unknown and not predictable. 
d)	A risk that is susceptible of becoming a black swan event. 
e)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.56 
12) Desirable risks are those that: 
a)	Can be assumed and mitigated properly. 
b)	Only have a possibility of upside or value creation. 
c)	Can be exploited to achieve a goal, strategy or objective. 
d)	Cannot result in losses or liabilities. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.56 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
13) Strategic risks are those associated with: 
a)	The analysis, decision and review of strategies. 
b)	The soundness and implementation of strategies. 
c)	The implementation and monitoring of strategies. 
d)	The selection and improvement of strategies. 
e)	The achievement of desirable outcomes. 	b) 	p.57 
14) An entity-level risk means: 
a)	A risk that applies to a government entity. 
b)	A risk that applies at the senior executive level. 
c)	A risk that applies to the entire organization. 
d)	A risk that applies to one or more business units. 
e)	A risk that has only one level of application. 	c) 	p.58 
15) Consequence categories are useful because: 
a)	They facilitate the analysis or risk components 
b)	They apply to companies and government entities. 
c)	They help identify risks that have similar impacts. 
d)	They mostly help the management of reputation risks. 
e)	They identify outcomes that are undesirable. 	c) 	p.58 
16) Tier classification is:  (select all that apply) 
a)	A method that helps determine which risks should have sub-categories. 
b)	A separation of significant risks that should be assessed judgmentally. 
c)	A differentiation of the risks that require attention at the most senior levels. 
d)	An approach sometimes used to differentiate emerging risks from other risks. 
e)	A process for deciding how to report risk information externally. 	c) 
d) 	p.59 
17) A risk taxonomy is: 
a)	A risk model presented in a diagram format. 
b)	A set of defined risk categories used for classification. 
c)	A list of risk categories to identify tax liabilities. 
d)	A method to classify risks in the financial services industry. 
e)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.59 
18) Routine risks are those that: 
a)	Organizations accept or avoid as part of their day to day processes and activities. 
b)	Are part of the normal operations and regular transactions of an organization. 
c)	Exclude the need for judgment when making risk management decisions. d) All of the above. 
e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.60 
19) Diversifiable risks are: 
a)	Risks that are managed using an investment portfolio. 
b)	Risks that are spread across geographic locations. 
c)	Risks that insurers are willing to accept. 
d)	Risks that can only be reduced through variation or spreading. 
e)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.61 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
20) Non-controllable risks: 
a)	Have sources and causes that can only be influenced or altered. 
b)	Can be managed but cannot be prevented. 
c)	Require techniques that are often beyond the scope of risk management. 
d)	Cannot be managed or mitigated easily and cost-effectively. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.62 
21) Which of the following statement is true? 
a)	Residual risk is synonymous with risk exposure. 
b)	Risk exposure is an excessive amount of residual risk. 
c)	Risk exposure is a measure of the total amount of residual risk. 
d)	Inherent risk and risk exposure are synonymous. 
e)	Risk exposure is a measure of the total amount of inherent risk. 	e) 	p.62 
22) If the assessment of inherent risk is the same as residual risk: 
a)	It means that the risk is the same regardless of what the organization does. 
b)	It means that the existing risk management actions and controls are ineffective. 
c)	It means that managers may not understand what is inherent risk. 
d)	It means that the organization should avoid such a risk. 
e)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.65 
23) Impact measures: 
a)	The overall outcome that a risk is expected to have based on its likelihood. 
b)	The overall outcome of the effects and consequences that a risk is expected to have. 
c)	The possibility that a risk may occur and have significant consequences. 
d)	The possibility that a risk may or may not have significant consequences. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.65 
24) Likelihood measures: 
a)	The probability that a risk may occur, based on its frequency. 
b)	The anticipated frequency of a risk, based on its probability of occurrence. 
c)	The possibility that a risk may occur, typically using a probability or frequency. 
d)	The possibility that a risk may have a significant overall impact. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.65 
25) Risk assessment scales and definitions:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Remove the reliance on judgment for risk assessment. 
b)	Guide the application of judgment in a consistent manner. 
c)	Help achieve a common understanding of the significance of each risk. 
d)	Ensure that the risk assessment is not subjective or intuitive. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 
c) 	p.69 
26) Risk appetite: 
a)	States the eagerness that an organization has toward risk. 
b)	Is the type and amount of risk that an organization wants to pursue or assume. 
c)	Is typically expressed as a target level of risk to exploit or retain. 
d)	Can be stated quantitatively or qualitatively. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.75 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
27) Risk tolerance: 
a)	Is often confused with risk appetite. 
b)	Is the amount of risk that an organization is willing and prepared to accept. 
c)	Indicates levels of risks and variations acceptable in relation to risk appetite. 
d)	Is usually defined as a range that is above and/or below risk appetite. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.80 
28) Risk-reward relationships: 
a)	Correlate the behavior of risks in relation to rewards. 
b)	Apply mostly in the context of financial investments. 
c)	Are more relevant for start-up companies in general. 
d)	Help determine if blue ocean strategies will succeed. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	f) 	p.82-83 
 
 
True or False Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Risk definitions continue to evolve and are refined over time. 	True 	p.48 
2. In the context of organizations, reward is defined based on stock market performance. 	False 	p.48 
3. Risk is typically defined by guideline-setting bodies and professional associations  in relation to uncertainties, objectives, events, effects and outcomes. 	True 	p.48-49 
4. Conceptually, there is no risk if there is absolute certainty. 	True 	p.48 
5. ISO defines risk as the effect of uncertainty on events and outcomes. 	False 	p.49 
6. COSO defines risk as the effect of uncertainty on objectives. 	False 	p.49 
7. Uncertainties are relevant for risk management only to the extent that they have an effect. 	True 	p.49 
8. Uncertainties reflect the state of not knowing what may occur and what might result. 	True 	p.51 
9. Understanding the components of risk is useful but not essential for analyzing risks. 	False 	p.51 
10. Uncertainties have two outcomes, namely direct effect and a resulting consequence. 	True 	p.51 
11. Uncertainty is attenuated with information, knowledge and experience. 	True 	p.51-52 
12. Events may consist of something happening or not happening. 	True 	p.52 
13. Events occur naturally or randomly, and are not caused by human activity. 	False 	p.52 
14. When analyzing risk outcomes, it is useful to differentiate causes and effects. 	False 	p.52 
15. When analyzing risk outcomes, it is useful to differentiate effects and consequences. 	True 	p.52 
16. Ultimately, all risks lead to the same outcome of value creation or destruction. 	True 	p.52 
17. Understanding how risks originate is fundamental for risk prevention. 	True 	p.53 
18. Understanding the consequences of risk is fundamental for risk  prevention. 	False 	p.53 
19. Sources of risk are elements that have the potential to give rise to a risk. 	True 	p.53 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
20. Sources of risk can be presented as uncertainties simply based on how they are labelled. 	True 	p.53 
21. The levelling of risk information does not vary significantly across organizations. 	False 	p.53 
22. What may present a threat to an organization may present an opportunity for another. 	True 	p.53 
23. A risk statement is a detailed description of a risk that follows a consistent format. 	False 	p.54 
24. A risk statement is a sentence that reflects the amount of risk that is acceptable. 	False 	p.54 
25. A risk statement should state an uncertainty and its direct effects. 	True 	p.54 
26. The main purpose of a risk statement is to facilitate the comparison between risks. 	False 	p.54 
27. A deficient management practice or control is a risk. 	False 	p.54 
28. Risk categories are useful to aggregate and analyze risk information. 	True 	p.54 
29. Risk categories are helpful to define risk statements. 	False 	p.54 
30. An emerging risk is a trend or changing condition that becomes disruptive over time. 	True 	p.55 
31. Desirable risks are those that offer a possibility of reward or value creation. 	True 	p.56 
32. There is no such thing as a desirable risk because all risks should be avoided. 	False 	p.56 
33. Undesirable risks are known as speculative risks in the insurance industry. 	False 	p.56 
34. Organizations should analyze whether threats can be turned into opportunities. 	True 	p.56 
35. Most pure risks are insurable. 	True 	p.56 
36. Strategic risks are associated with the soundness and implementation of strategies. 	True 	p.57 
37. Operational risks include the risks associated with strategy implementation. 	False 	p.57 
38. Financial risks mostly relate to investments in securities such as stocks and bonds. 	False 	p.57 
39. Most organizations choose to categorize risks by management function. 	True 	p.57 
40. An entity-level risk is a risk that is confined to a single division or business unit. 	False 	p.58 
41. Consequence categories are useful for risk management integration. 	True 	p.58 
42. Tier classification helps determine risk categories and sub-categories. 	False 	p.59 
43. Tier classification is sometimes used to differentiate emerging risks from other risks. 	True 	p.59 
44. A risk taxonomy refers to a set of defined risk categories used for classification. 	True 	p.59 
45. Non-routine risks are always more significant than routine risks. 	False 	p.60 
46. Non-routine risks should be avoided to the best extent possible. 	False 	p.61 
47. Measurable risks can be estimated with relative accuracy, usually with historical data. 	True 	p.61 
48. Non-measurable risks can only be estimated based on prior experience. 	False 	p.61 
49. Diversifiable risks can only be reduced through variation or spreading. 	False 	p.61 
50. In general, all risks can be managed and controlled. 	False 	p.61 
51. In general, all risks can be managed, but not all risks are controllable. 	True 	p.61 
52. Inherent risk is the risk that exists without risk management actions and controls. 	True 	p.62 
53. Risk exposure is the risk that remains after risk management actions and controls. 	False 	p.62 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
54. A risk can have cascading and compounding effects, also known as spiral effects. 	True 	p.63 
55. A compounding effect is a combination of effects that happen simultaneously. 	False 	p.62 
56. Inherent risk assessment is commonly used in practice. 	False 	p.65 
57. Conceptually, the combination of impact and likelihood reflects an expected value. 	True 	p.65 
58. Impact measures the direct effects that a risk is expected to have if it occurs. 	False 	p.65 
59. Likelihood measures the probability that a risk may occur based on its frequency. 	False 	p.65 
60. It is possible to assess the significance of a risk using a single criterion. 	True 	p.65 
61. The impact and likelihood criteria re relevant for assessing opportunities and threats. 	True 	p.66 
62. It is useful but not necessary to specify a time horizon when assessing risks. 	False 	p.67 
63. Achieving a greater level accuracy in risk assessment is always beneficial. 	False 	p.69 
64. Risk culture and risk awareness are the building blocks of risk attitude. 	True 	p.74 
65. A risk naïve organization is an organization that is unwilling to assume risks. 	False 	p.73 
66. Risk attitude is reflected by how risks are sought or avoided, aggressively or passively. 	True 	p.74 
67. Risk attitude can be balanced but cannot be neutral. 	False 	p.74 
68. Risk appetite is the amount of risk that an organization is willing to accept. 	False 	p.75 
69. Risk appetite is the amount of risk that an organization wants to pursue or assume. 	True 	p.75 
70. Risk capacity is a measure of the ability of an organization to manage risks. 	False 	p.77 
71. Risk capability refers to the maximum amount of risk that an organization can absorb. 	False 	p.77 
72. Risk tolerance is the level of risk that an organization is willing to pursue or assume. 	False 	p.80 
73. Risk tolerance is the level of risk that an organization is willing and prepared to accept. 	True 	p.80 
74. Risk tolerance is may be defined quantitatively or qualitatively. 	True 	p.81 
75. Risk appetite is less relevant in the context of operational risks. 	False 	p.81-82 
76. Risk tolerance is less relevant in the context of strategic risks. 	False 	p.81-82 
77. Risk-reward relationships correlate the behavior of risks in relation to rewards. 	False 	p.82 
78. Risk-reward relationships correlate the behavior of rewards in relation to risks. 	True 	p.82 
79. Not pursuing or assuming enough risk may cause value destruction. 	True 	p.82 
80. Insufficient risk capacity and risk appetite always limit value creation. 	False 	p.83 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3  
Risk Management Framework 
 
 
Review Questions 
 
1. The concept of frameworks 
 
a)	What is a management framework?   (p.92) 
A management framework is a set of components or elements that enable and support a management function or process. It is a frame or assembly of components that make the function or process work. A management framework includes the function or process itself, along with everything else required. The components are interlinked but do not follow a sequence. They work in harmony with each other, and with the function or process that they support. 
 
b)	What is the ISO definition of a risk management framework?   (p.92) 
ISO defines a risk management framework as a “set of components that provide the foundation and organizational arrangements for designing, implementing, monitoring, reviewing and continually improving risk management throughout the organization.” 
 
2. Risk management framework components 
 
a)	Sketch the risk management framework covered in this chapter.   (p.93) 
Risk management framework components can be divided between foundation and structure.
Structure components  – Establish the approach for risk management
Governance and management structures		Risk management process 		Risk management integration		Continuous improvement
Foundation components  – Create the conditions for risk management
Leadership and culture		Purpose and outcomes		Knowledge and skills		Communication and consultation

 
b)	Explain why and how organizations may create variations of the framework.   (p.94) Organizations create variations to suit their context and needs. These variations are based on preferences regarding how components should be labelled and divided to facilitate their understanding. For example, knowledge and skills may be called education and training. Governance and management structures may be reworded as management and accountability structures. Continuous improvement can be retitled as review and performance management. Organizations may also divide components into more discrete parts. For example, leadership and culture can be divided as two separate components. In the end, what matters is to design a framework that is well understood and that covers all the essential elements. 
 
3. Risk management systems 
 
a)	What is a management system?   (p.94) 
A	management system is a prescribed approach for carrying out a management function or activity.  It reflects the practices that an organization adopts to fulfill particular needs. 
 
b)	What is a risk management system?   (p.94) 
A	risk management system can be described as the focus, approaches and principles that organizations adopt for risk management. 
 
c)	Outline risk management focus differences in a matrix.   (p.95) 
	Strategic risk emphasis:	Contemporary risk management:
Greater 
Risk management focuses mostly on 	Risk management focuses on all risks focus on strategic risks, namely those associated 	affecting organizational performance and 
strategic 	with the soundness (selection) and 	results, including the achievement of goals risks	implementation (execution) of strategies. 	strategies and objectives. This approach is 
This approach is consistent with the 	consistent with the ISO 31000 risk manaCOSO ERM framework. It is sometimes 	gement guidelines. It is sometimes referred referred to as Strategic Risk Management.	to as Integrated Risk Management.
	Conventional risk management:	Operational risk emphasis:
Risk management focuses on risks that 	Risk management focuses mostly on can only result in negative consequences, 	operational risks, namely those that impair losses and liabilities. There is also limited 	the ability of organizations to function effecintegration of risk management between 	tively. This approach is commonly known organizational functions. This approach 	as Operational Risk Management. It is also is commonly known as Traditional Risk 	associated with Governance, Risk and Management or “siloed” risk management.	Compliance (GRC) models and systems.
Greater focus on operational risks
Figure 3.2  – Risk Management Focus Differences
  
d) What causes risk management focus differences between organizations?   (p.95) Differences of risk management focus are normally driven by the nature and extent of risk exposures, and where risk management is perceived to add value. For instance, organizations that are highly impacted by emerging risks and disruptive trends, and that must innovate and transform their business models to remain relevant or competitive, will naturally place a greater emphasis on strategic risks. Alternatively, organizations that operate in a stable environment with limited need to change their products, services or business models, tend to adopt more of an operational focus to risk management, especially if they are highly regulated. 
 
4. Risk management systems – COSO ERM focus 
 
a) Explain how the COSO ERM framework differs from the COSO internal control framework regarding risk management, and the rationale for the difference.   (p.96) 
Defining features of the COSO ERM framework are the integration of risk management with strategy, and a definition of risk that centers on the achievement of strategy and business objectives (defined by COSO as the measurable steps for strategy implementation). By contrast, COSO proposes that operational, reporting and compliance objectives are managed using internal controls. The COSO definition of internal control excludes strategic (business) objectives. 
COSO differentiates ERM frameworks from internal control frameworks based on the nature of the different objectives that organizations have, and by extension the underlying risks associated with these objectives. The rationale behind the COSO differentiation rests on the fact that operational, reporting and compliance risks are better known and more predictable. Accordingly, these risks can be managed effectively with internal controls. By comparison, strategic risks are less known and less predictable. Therefore, strategic risks require a management approach that is different from how internal controls are applied in an operational context. 
 
5. Risk management systems – Siloed and integrated approaches 
 
a)	Briefly describe the difference between siloed and integrated risk management.   (p.98) 
•	Siloed risk management - Refers to the management of risks in isolation, with limited overall structure and coordination across management functions and business units. Risk information is not widely shared, and risks are not identified, assessed and reported using a common approach and consistent format. Responsibilities for managing risks are dispersed, and few structures are in place for the analysis of relationships and interdependencies between risks. 
•	Integrated risk management - Refers to the management of risks holistically, using a wellcoordinated and consistent approach across the organization. Risk management integration addresses the issues associated with siloed risk management, without impeding the ability of organizational functions and units to manage risks specific to their activities. 
 
b)	Does siloed risk management mean that risks are not well managed?   (p.98) 
Siloed risk management does not necessarily mean that risks within organizational functions and units are mismanaged. However, siloed risk management entails that the overall management of risks is probably sub-optimal and possibly dysfunctional for the organization as a whole. 
 
6. Risk management systems – Principles and rules-based systems 
 
a)	Compare principles-based and rules-based systems.   (p.99) 
Principles-Based Systems 	Rules-Based Systems 
Characteristics: 
-	States the objectives or outcomes to achieve 
-	Usually includes optional guidelines 
-	Management functions and business units must demonstrate that appropriate steps are taken to achieve the objectives or outcomes 	Characteristics: 
-	States the approaches or methods to follow 
-	Typically involves mandatory procedures 
-	Management functions and business units must demonstrate that the approaches and methods are applied as intended 
Advantages: 
-	Allows flexibility and judgment 
-	Ensures that approaches are adapted 
-	Helps foster initiative and innovation 	Advantages: 
-	Benefits clarity and instills discipline 
-	Ensures that approaches are consistent - Helps achieve a common approach 
Limitations: 
-	May be perceived as vague or tentative 
-	Judgment exercised may not be appropriate to achieve the objectives or outcomes sought 
-	May not results in a due process 	Limitations: 
-	May be viewed as onerous or unsuitable 
-	Procedures applied may not be appropriate to particular situations or circumstances 
-	May discourage proposals for better solutions 
 	 
b)	Describe principles-based risk management frameworks.   (p.99-100) 
Principles-based risk management frameworks are designed on the basis of principles that state the objectives or outcomes to achieve, but do not prescribe the approaches or methods for achieving them. Under this system, risk management frameworks outline what is needed, but do not oblige how to do things. The emphasis is on meeting the principles, not on the approaches and methods followed. Management functions and business units have the ability to select and apply the approaches and methods that fit their individual circumstances. 
 
 
c)	Describe rules-based risk management frameworks.   (p.100) 
Rules-based risk management frameworks are designed on the basis of rules that prescribe the approaches and methods to follow for achieving the stated objectives and outcomes. With this system, frameworks detail what to do and how to do it, leaving little room for interpretation or judgment. If the approaches and methods are followed, it is expected that the objectives and outcomes will be met. The emphasis is on applying processes and methodologies, not on finding innovative or alternative ways to meet objectives and outcomes. Management functions and business units may request to do things differently, but they need an authorization for doing so. 
 
7. Risk management capabilities 
 
a)	What is a capability model, and how can it be used?   (p.100) 
What it is:  A capability model is a matrix that sets out levels of capability or proficiency across elements or components of a management framework. Capability models outline an evolution of practices ranging from early stages to highly advanced ones. Each level in the evolution demonstrates a progression of capabilities that translates into greater management maturity. 
How it can be used:   
•	Understand the normal progression of risk management capabilities. 
•	Determine the current state of risk management and areas to improve. 
•	Discuss and agree on a desirable level of capability to achieve. 
•	Develop an action plan for implementing additional capabilities. 
•	Assess the progress of risk management capabilities over time. 
•	Communicate risk management capabilities to key stakeholders. 
 
b)	What are the different benefits of capability models?   (p.100) Capability models help organizations: 
•	Understand the normal progression of risk management capabilities. 
•	Determine the current state of risk management and areas to improve. 
•	Discuss and agree on a desirable level of capability to achieve. 
•	Develop an action plan for implementing additional capabilities. 
•	Assess the progress of risk management capabilities over time. 
•	Communicate risk management capabilities to key stakeholders. 
 
c)	What are the five levels of capabilities applicable to risk management?   (p.100) Ad Hoc, Defined, Managed, Integrated, Optimized 
 
d)	Describe what it means to achieve the managed level.   (p.100) The managed level involves the following capabilities: 
•	A senior executive leads ERM and there is a dedicated function for ERM. 
•	Risk appetite and risk tolerance are established, and risk levels are monitored. 
•	Managers receive training, guidance, advice and support for managing risks. 
•	A standard risk management process is applied consistently across the organization. 
•	Risk information supports decisions and the development of action plans. 
 
e)	Explain what a repeatable process means.   (p.101) 
A repeatable process is one that is well defined and supported by a sound framework, and by a methodology that can be reapplied over time. With a repeatable process, the management of significant risks does not depend on anyone in particular. In the absence of one or more key individuals, the repeatable process can be applied by other employees, and a similar outcome should result. Every organization should aim to achieve a repeatable process as a minimum. 
 
 
8. Framework design considerations 
 
a)	What are the seven criteria for framework design?   (p.103) 
Suitability, Adaptability, Simplicity, Subservience, Relevance, Scalability, Responsiveness 
 
b)	Explain the criteria of scalability and responsiveness.   (p.103) 
•	Scalability - The practices and methods for managing risks should be proportionate to  the magnitude of risks. They should also be well adapted to the risks. A risk management framework should allow flexibility to expand or adapt practices and methods when required. It should not impose a one-size-fits-all approach. 
•	Responsiveness - Risk management must be responsive to stakeholder expectations. A risk management framework needs to give direction for the management of risks, and provide assurance that the directions are carried out as intended. It also requires mechanisms for reviewing risk management performance. 
 
9. Leadership and culture 
 
a)	Explain tone at the top and why it is important for risk management.   (p.104) 
Tone at the top is the internal environment and conditions that senior executives create by communicating, leading by example and reinforcing desirable behaviors. It emanates from the attitudes, operating styles and behaviors of leaders.  Their attitudes and actions greatly influence organizational culture, and are critical for the implementation of ERM.  Tone at the top is set based on what is written, what is said, and more importantly what is actually done. 
 
b)	Provide one example where tone at the top impacts risk management negatively.   (p.104) If there is pressure by a senior executive to relax practices to try to achieve better results, or if decisions are inconsistent with risk appetite statements or risk management policies, such tone at the top impacts risk culture negatively.  In this case, employees get a sense that risk management is not important, and that the end justifies the means. 
 
c)	Provide two examples of strong versus weak risk culture indicators.   (p.106) Students may choose from the following: 
Indicators 	Strong Risk Culture 	Weak Risk Culture 
Directions 	Risk appetite and tolerance levels are clearly defined and actively managed. 	Risk appetite and tolerance are not defined and therefore not managed. 
Policies 	Policies outline expectations for  the management of individual risks. 	Expectations for managing risks are not clear or not always complied with. 
Responsibilities 	Responsibilities for managing risks are allocated to specific employees. 	Responsibilities for managing individual risks are not assigned. 
Decisions 	Risk information is actively sought  and used to make decisions. 	Risks are considered only intuitively as part of the decisions made. 
Communications 	Risk information is shared openly and discussions are encouraged. 	People are hesitant to talk about  risks, and risk issues are not raised. 
 	 
 
 
 
 
 
10. Purpose and outcomes 
 
a)	Why is it important to establish the purpose and outcomes for ERM?   (p.106) 
Establishing the purpose and outcomes of ERM is essential for ensuring that risk management is well understood and focused. A clear understanding and focus are necessary for everyone, including the ERM function itself, board members, senior executives, and every management function and business unit. The purpose and outcomes indicate what ERM is about and what it is trying to achieve. Organizational alignment and integration cannot take place unless there is a clear sense of purpose and outcomes. 
 
b)	Explain the difference between mission, vision, outcomes and objectives.   (p.107) 
•	Mission – Outlines a mandate or raison d’être. It reflects what is done currently. 
•	Vision – A vision defines a desirable future state and provides inspiration. It expresses a realistic goal achievable within a specified timeframe. 
•	Outcome – Outcomes are subordinate goals that are relevant to the vision. 
•	Objectives – Are the are specific and measurable actions to achieve an outcome. 
 
c)	What is a charter and what does an ERM charter normally include?   (p.108) 
A charter is a formal document that describes what a function or entity is about, what it is responsible for, and the authority under which it exists. A charter is useful for communicating to other management functions and business units what the ERM function does.  
An ERM charter normally includes a brief description of risk management, the mandate or mission of the risk management function, the vision for risk management, the roles and responsibilities of the function, and the authority that allows it to operate. 
 
11. Knowledge and skills 
 
a)	Explain the difference between knowledge, skills and abilities.   (p.109) 
Knowledge is acquired mostly through education, while skills are developed mostly from work experience. Abilities are more innate to individuals, although they can also be developed through education and experience. For example, designing a marketing program requires knowledge acquired through formal education, and skills developed from work experience. Presenting the marketing program to a group of executives requires the ability to communicate and make presentations. All three attributes, namely knowledge, skills and abilities form competencies. 
In practice, most organizations define competencies in terms of knowledge and skills where: 
•	Knowledge is acquired through education and professional training 
•	Skills are the aptitude or talent (abilities) for doing things 
•	Experience - contributes to acquiring knowledge and developing skills 
 
b)	What are the four types of skills that risk management professionals need?   (p.110-111) • Interpersonal skills - reach out, network, develop relationships, gain trust, engage others, etc. 
•	Analytical skills - analyze risk info, develop risk statements, report risk info, estimate risks, etc. 
•	Communication skills - written and verbal, presentations, work sessions, active listening, etc. 
•	Leadership skills - implement framework, influence culture, develop capabilities, ask difficult 
questions, challenge assumptions, voice concerns, influence decisions, enable integration, etc.  
 
12. Communication and consultation 
 
a)	Explain the difference between communication and consultation.   (p.111) 
The difference between communication and consultation has to do with how the exchange of information takes place. Communication occurs iteratively back and forth, while consultation engages in a two-way dialogue immediately from the start. In both cases, the purpose is to exchange information, namely to inform and to obtain information. 
b)	Explain the two main barriers to open communications.   (p.113) 
•	Fear - not in my best interest, stress of delivering messages, may compromise my career • Futility - nothing will be done, I’m wasting my time, management will not listen 
 
c)	How can organizations overcome the two communication barriers?   (p.113) 
•	Provide opportunities for raising issues, and avoid creating a culture of blame. 
o	Forums where risks can be discussed openly. 
o	Safe zones where issues can be raised without fear of retribution or anonymously. 
•	Ensure that messages are not ignored and provide feed-back to originators. 
 
13. Governance and management structures 
 
a)	What is the difference between risk oversight and risk management?   (p.114) 
•	Risk oversight – The governance that boards of directors exercise for risk management is commonly known as risk oversight. The purpose of risk oversight is to provide directions for risk appetite and tolerance, ensure that there is a sound framework and process for risk management, and obtain assurance that actual risks are consistent with directions provided.  
•	Risk management – Risk management is what the executive officers, managers and staff do to carry out or execute the directions of board [having to do with managing risks]. The chief executive officer is responsible and accountable for the management of risks, which includes making sure that the organization has the necessary framework, process and capabilities.  
 
b)	What are the four components of a risk management structure?   (p.116-117) 
•	ERM leader – the person leading the risk management function / the ERM function 
•	ERM function – group that provides support services to other functions and units 
•	Risk owners - executives or managers assigned management responsibility for specific risks 
•	Risk management committee – support coordination and integration, resolve issues 
 
c)	What are the roles of the ERM leader? Briefly explain each of them.   (p.116) ERM leaders have four basic roles.  
•	Educator - ensure that risk management is well understood.  
•	Advisor - provide guidance and support to senior executives and risk owners.  
•	Coordinator - for ERM activities and risk management integration.  
•	Overseer - ensuring that risks are appropriately managed in accordance with directions. 
 
14. Risk management integration 
 
a)	What are the main integration points and mechanisms for risk management?   (p.120) 
•	Plans - Strategic and business planning 
•	Policies - Policies for ERM and specific risks 
•	Processes - Process management 
•	Information - Management information systems 
•	Decisions - Decision-making structures 
•	Performance - Performance management 
 
b)	What should ERM functions provide in relation to each integration point?   (p.120) 
•	Plans - Support to analyze risks relating to organizational strategies and objectives 
•	Policies - An ERM policy that  outlines risk ownership roles and responsibilities 
•	Processes - A risk management  framework and process that help manage risks consistently 
•	Information - Analyses and reporting of  risks from an organization-wide perspective 
•	Decisions - Support to ensure that decisions consider risks and risk management priorities 
•	Performance - Assistance for developing indicators of risk relating to performance objectives 
15. Continuous improvement 
 
a)	Briefly explain active monitoring and periodic review.   (p.122-123) 
•	Active monitoring – is the ongoing surveillance and analysis of activities, risks and results, to determine if they are as intended or expected. It identifies fluctuations, variances, deviations, discrepancies, anomalies and their causes. Active monitoring is done using indicators and parameters that track activities, risks, status and performance on an ongoing basis. The findings are used to modify framework and process designs, or strengthen their application. 
•	Periodic review – is a formal examination conducted at regular intervals to determine if changes are desirable. It can be applied to the risk management framework and process, or to the management of specific risks. Periodic reviews analyze the design of a framework and process to see if they remain appropriate. Periodic reviews also examine the application and results of frameworks and processes to see if the results are consistent with expectations. 
 
b)	Which of these two approaches is considered more effective and why?   (p.122-123) 
Because active monitoring is done on a real-time basis, it is generally considered more effective than reviews or evaluations done periodically. Moreover, active monitoring can be automated using computer systems and software that can analyze large volumes of data at a very low cost. When combined with analysis by risk management professionals, computerized techniques provide a cost-effective approach for active monitoring. 
 
16. Framework implementation strategies 
 
a)	What does it mean to motivate the change?   (p.126) 
In the context of change initiatives and change management, motivating the change means making people accept the need for change, by recognizing that there is a better way and that the status quo is not acceptable. This is the first step in a change management process. 
 
b)	Briefly describe five strategies of the framework implementation approach.   (p.126) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Analyze capabilities – Understand context, how risks are managed, what information is used, how decisions are made, etc. Analyze capabilities, assess readiness, identify barriers and plan. 
•	Confirm the purpose – Explain risk and risk management, benefits of ERM. Commitment through clear understanding and compelling proposition. Agreement on goals and outcomes. 
•	Manage expectations – Can take three to five years, use a capability model to explain capabilities needed, make it clear that the implementation is a [complex] change initiative. 
•	Get a clear mandate – Obtain a clear mandate and commitment (including resources) from the board and senior management before starting. Mandate should be communicated. 
•	Develop a thoughtful plan – Framework fits. Plan follows a logical sequence. Components designed thoughtfully. Foundations before structures. Each deliverable is a project. 
•	Solicit early feed-back – Senior management working group, feed-back on framework design and implementation plan. Ideas tested up front by getting reactions from key individuals. 
•	Start small – Too big increases chances of failure. Focus on a limited number of priorities at a time. Develop good examples or prototypes and fine tune the approach. 
•	Keep it simple – Language that people understand, practical deliverables. Framework designed to add value, not an administrative burden. Clear, concise, straight to the point. 
•	Do it gradually – Incremental approach for implementation. Interventions well orchestrated and  good timing that makes sense to everyone. Move at a measured pace, one step at a time. 
•	Customize –  Not a one-size fits all, solution adapted to context, needs and preferences. 
Framework makes sense and fits the organization to avoid cynicism and resistance to change. 
•	Integrate – Stand-alone ERM generally fails. Integration with strategic planning and core functions is essential. Risk management is an enabler of success, not to become self-serving. 
•	Demonstrate progress – Demonstrate progress and results to sustain commitment. 
Communicate deliverables and achievements, progress according to plan, early successes. 
•	Resolve issues as they occur – Issues or challenges dealt with as they occur, not left unresolved and allowed to fester. Describe challenges encountered, and solutions proposed. 
•	Do not rush information technology solutions – Good understanding of needs before considering applications. Need clarity on capabilities, nature of risks, scale of risk mgmt. 
 
 
Other Short Answer Questions 
 
1.	What are important considerations prior to designing a risk management framework?   (p.94-100) 
•	Decide on the overall approach for risk management - main focus of risk management 
•	Determine the capabilities that are needed - what level of capabilities is needed 
•	Organizational context, needs and preferences - consider all stakeholders 
•	Kind of risk management system that an organization wants to implement o Risk management focus:  traditional, strategic, operational, contemporary o Siloed or integrated risk management 
o Principles-based or rules-based risk management 
 
2.	Explain what is a GRC model.   (p.96-97) 
The Governance, Risk Management and Compliance (GRC) model is a capability model that integrates elements of governance, performance management, risk management, ethics, compliance and audit. The model is similar to a management control framework with four components stated as: learn, align, perform, and review. It outlines actions and controls that help organizations achieve their objectives in a manner consistent with their values, ethics and compliance obligations. The GRC model is typically used as part of ethics and compliance programs. It is maintained by OCEG and supported by computer applications from technology vendors. 
 
3.	Explain why ethics and compliance programs can have undesirable effects   (p.97) Some organizations that practice risk management with a focus on operational risks merge  or closely integrate their risk management activities with their ethics and compliance program. Although ethics and compliance programs have benefits, they have a tendency to transform risk management into a compliance and control activity. As a result the expectations and desirable outcomes of ERM are not met [because risk management becomes compliance-driven]. 
 
4.	Outline the shortcomings of siloed risk management   (p.98) 
•	Overall management of risks is probably sub-optimal and possibly dysfunctional. 
•	Organizations cannot become risk aware because risk information is not widely shared. 
•	Risks not identified, assessed and reported using a common approach and consistent format. 
•	Limited ability to analyze relationships and interdependencies between risks. 
•	Some organizational functions and units may not be transparent with risk information. 
•	Board members and senior executives may only have a partial view of significant risks. 
•	Risk-related decisions may be misguided and resources misallocated. 
•	Distinct risk cultures may emerge within management functions and business units. 
•	Risk appetites may be insufficient or excessive within management functions and business units. 
•	Risk-reward relationships not managed to optimal levels for the organization as a whole. 
 
5.	Outline the benefits of integrated risk management   (p.98) 
•	Address the issues of siloed risk management (listed above). 
•	Allow the organization to manage risks in a structured and coordinated manner. 
•	Consider risk capacity, risk appetite and risk-reward relationships holistically. 
•	Much better chance of achieving exceptional performance and results. 
•	Much better chance of maintaining success for the long term. 
6.	Explain what managing risks “holistically” actually means:   (p.98) 
Managing risks holistically means managing risks for the benefit of the organization as a whole,  as opposed to managing risks only within individual management functions and business units without considering the implications for the organization as a whole. 
 
7.	Outline the advantages and limitations of principles-based systems:   (p.99) Advantages: 
•	Allows flexibility and judgment 
•	Ensures that approaches are adapted • Helps foster initiative and innovation Limitations: 
•	May be perceived as vague or tentative 
•	Judgment exercised may not be appropriate to achieve the objectives or outcomes sought 
•	May not results in a due process 
 
8.	Outline the advantages and limitations of rules-based systems:   (p.99) Advantages: 
•	Benefits clarity and instills discipline 
•	Ensures that approaches are consistent 
•	Helps achieve a common approach Limitations: 
•	May be viewed as onerous or unsuitable 
•	Procedures applied may not be appropriate to particular situations or circumstances 
•	May discourage proposals for better solutions 
 
9.	Explain how capability and maturity are different from structure and formality.   (p.102) Capability and maturity should not be confused with structure and formality. Being able to apply advanced risk management practices without relying on formal structures is a sign of maturity. However, it is very difficult for any organization to achieve process discipline without a certain amount of structure and formality, especially when risk management is at an early stage. The amount of structure and formality needed is mostly driven by organizational culture, size and complexity. Less structure and formality should be required over time. When risk management practices are very well understood and become second nature, the organization is at an advanced level of maturity. 
 
10.	Explain scalability in the context of a risk management framework.   (p.103) 
The practices and methods for managing risks should be proportionate to the magnitude of risks. They should also be well adapted to the risks. A risk management framework should allow flexibility to expand or adapt practices and methods. It should not impose a one-size-fits-all approach. 
 
11.	Explain the approach that can be taken for improving risk culture.   (p.105) 
Improving risk culture is a long term and deliberate process that typically begins with an objective assessment of strengths and weaknesses. The assessment is followed by a change initiative that addresses the issues identified. It is essential that risk management frameworks include strategies and activities for developing and nurturing risk culture. 
 
12.	Explain what is meant by adopting a common language for risk management.   (p.112-113) Organizations that want to implement ERM and achieve advanced risk management capabilities can only do so if everyone in the organization has a common understanding of risk and risk management concepts. Risk management frameworks promote the use of a common language, by including a glossary of terms, and providing examples of risks in training and process documentation. The common language should include a definition of risk, risk management and ERM, along with a risk model or taxonomy that resonates well within the organization. It should also include a definition of every key term used for risk management. Glossaries available in guidelines and publications are good checklists. The common language should be consistent with risk management guidelines. 
13.	Explain lessons learned as a continuous improvement approach.   (p.124) 
The analysis of lessons learned involves going over successes, failures and close calls, to determine how and why they happened, what to remember, and how to emulate or prevent them in the future. This continuous improvement approach should apply to all management frameworks and processes, including those for risk management. When risk management framework or process issues happen, or when risks materialize, it is useful to conduct a post-mortem analysis to learn from experience.  The lessons learned should be documented for reference. They can be used for updating policies, changing risk management practices, communications, training and education, etc. 
 
14.	How and why should a risk management framework be documented?   (p.125) 
•	How – Risk management frameworks must be documented for reference. The documentation normally includes an overview of each framework component, namely its purpose and description, the approach followed and the main deliverables or outputs produced. 
•	Why – When risks materialize with dire consequences, organizations must demonstrate to their investors or contributors [and other stakeholders] that they were not negligent or complacent. Otherwise, their reputation may be severely impacted and they can expect lawsuits. Framework documentation also provides many benefits. For example, documentation supports education and training, develops a common understanding, ensures that roles and responsibilities are understood, influences risk culture, ensures that risk management practices are repeatable, etc. 
 
 
Multiple Choice Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1) A management framework is:  (select all that apply) 
a)	A set of components or elements that are used for risk management. 
b)	A set of components or elements that enable and support a function or a process. 
c)	A frame or assembly of components or elements that follow a sequence. 
d)	A diagram that includes foundation and structure components or elements. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.92 
2) Which of the following are framework foundation components? (select all that apply) 
a)	Governance and management structures 
b)	Risk management process 
c)	Communication and consultation 
d)	Risk management integration 
e)	Continuous improvement 	c) 	p.93 
3) Differences of risk management focus among organizations are: 
a)	Driven by the nature of risk exposures and where risk management adds value. 
b)	Based on the most significant residual risks that an organization has to deal with. 
c)	Decided in accordance with guideline or framework adopted for risk management. 
d)	Determined based on regulations such as those issued by the SEC, NYSE, etc. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.95 
4) The main risk management focus differences observed among organizations are: 
a)	Strategic, operational, financial, and compliance. 
b)	Strategic, operational, traditional, and conventional. 
c)	Conventional, contemporary, strategic and operational. 
d)	Conventional, traditional, contemporary and integrated. 
e)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.95 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
5) The Governance, Risk Management and Compliance (GRC) model is: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	A risk management framework that incorporates governance and compliance. 
b)	A capability model that is similar to a management control framework. 
c)	An ethics and compliance program that is a substitute for risk management. d) All of the above. 
e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.97 
6) Siloed risk management refers to: 
a)	The management of risks applicable to the storage of goods in siloes. 
b)	The management of risks done within management functions and business units. 
c)	The management of risks that only affect individual functions and units. 
d)	The management of risks in isolation, with limited overall structure and integration. e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.98 
7) Integrated risk management refers to: 
a)	The integration of the ERM function with all other functions and units. 
b)	The management of risks holistically, using a well-coordinated approach. 
c)	Risk management that integrates with strategic planning and decision-making. 
d)	The coordination of risk management efforts to prevent sub-optimal results. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.98 
8) A principles-based system:  (selected all that apply) 
a)	States the approaches or methods to follow 
b)	Allows flexibility and judgement 
c)	May be viewed as onerous or unsuitable 
d)	May not result in a due process 
e)	All of the above 
f)	None of the above 	b) 
d) 	p.99 
9) A rules-based system:  (selected all that apply) 
a)	States the objectives or outcomes to achieve 
b)	Benefits clarity and instills discipline 
c)	May be perceived as vague or tentative 
d)	May discourage proposals for better solutions 
e)	All of the above 
f)	None of the above 	b) 
d) 
 	p.100 
10) The purpose of a capability model is to: 
a)	Set out levels of capability or proficiency for the ERM function. 
b)	Evaluate and improve an organizational function, process or activity. 
c)	Outline all of the capabilities that an organizations wants to implement. 
d)	Single out capabilities that should be included in a risk model. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.100 
11) The five maturity levels of risk management are: 
a)	Ad hoc, Managed, Repeatable, Integrated, Optimized 
b)	Defined, Siloed, Integrated, Advanced, Optimized 
c)	Ad hoc, Defined, Managed, Integrated, Optimized 
d)	Traditional, Financial, Operational, Strategic, Contemporary 
e)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.101 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
12) The following are 5 of the 7 criteria that guide framework design: 
a)	Suitability, Adaptability, Capability, Scalability, Responsiveness 
b)	Simplicity, Capacity, Adaptability, Flexibility, Scalability 
c)	Suitability, Adaptability, Simplicity, Subservience, Relevance 
d)	Simplicity, Capacity, Capability, Relevance, Responsiveness 
e)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.103 
13) Which of the following framework design criteria explanations are incorrect: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Suitability - framework is consistent with culture and management style 
b)	Adaptability - framework is dynamic and progressive, not static or change resistant 
c)	Simplicity - framework is practical and easy to understand, uses plain language 
d)	Subservience - framework supports what the ERM function is responsible for 
e)	Relevance - framework focuses on the greatest risk exposures, not trivial issues 
f)	Scalability - practices and methods can be applied proportionately to risks 
g)	Responsiveness - framework supports effective risk management responses 	d) 
g) 	p.103 
14) Risk management leadership is exercised by: 
a)	Setting the tone for risk management. 
b)	Demonstrating a commitment to risk management. 
c)	Managing the risk culture of the organization. 
d)	All of he above. 
e)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.104 
15) Demonstrating commitment to risk management includes: 
a)	Setting the tone for risk management. 
b)	Establishing an ERM function with a clear mandate. 
c)	Managing the risk culture of the organization. 
d)	All of the above 
e)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.105 
16) Establishing the purpose and outcomes of ERM is essential for: 
a)	Ensuring that risk management is well understood and focused. 
b)	Implementing a capability model that supports the mission. 
c)	Conducting stakeholder consultations and discussing expectations. 
d)	Establishing tone at the top and commitment for the ERM function. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.106 
17) A ERM charter is: 
a)	A policy document that states what the organization wants to achieve with ERM,  and outlines roles, responsibilities and accountabilities for managing risks. 
b)	A formal document that describes what the ERM function is about, what it is responsible for, and the authority under which it exists. 
c)	A framework of elements or components only applicable to the ERM function. 
d)	A plane or a boat that is chartered for the ERM function to facilitate its travel. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.108 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
18) Which of these lists accurately reflects the skills needed by risk management professionals? 
a)	Communication, consultation, facilitation, and leadership 
b)	Facilitation, active listening, presentation, and persuasion 
c)	Interpersonal, analytical, communication, and leadership 
d)	Analytical, communication, facilitation and integration 
e)	Explanation, communication, persuasion, and leadership 	c) 	p.110 
19) In the context of risk management, encouraging open communications means:  
(select all that apply) 
a)	Encouraging the communication and escalation of issues and risks 
b)	Inviting managers and staff to voice work-related complaints openly 
c)	Using formal and informal channels to solicit feed-back from stakeholders 
d)	Adopting mechanisms that help remove communication barriers 
e)	Ensuring that there is a process for complaints and whistleblowing f) 	All of the above 
g) None of the above 	a) 
d) 	p.113 
20) Governance refers to: 
a)	The work that governments do in their oversight of companies. 
b)	The authority that board members or equivalent exercise. 
c)	The risk oversight of board members or equivalent. 
d)	The authority of board members and senior executives. 
e)	The management of information technology priorities. 
f)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.114 
21) The purpose of risk oversight is to: 
a)	Provide directions for risk appetite and tolerance. 
b)	Ensure that there is a sound framework and process for risk management. 
c)	Obtain assurance that actual risks are consistent with directions provided. d) All of the above.  
e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.114 
22) Risk management structures include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	A risk oversight committee that reports to the board. 
b)	An audit committee that reports to the board. 
c)	An executive team or committee that reports to the chief executive officer. 
d)	A risk management leader, ERM leader or chief risk officer. 
e)	Risk owners assigned responsibilities for managing risks. 
f)	A management committee that controls the ERM function. g) All of the above. 	d) 
e) 	p.115-118 
23) An ERM function: 
a)	Carries out the roles and responsibilities assigned to the ERM leader. 
b)	Develops and maintains knowledge, methodologies and tools for risk management. 
c)	Is usually a corporate-level function that may or may not use a centralized model. d) All of the above. 
e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.117 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
24) Ideally, an ERM leader should not report to a risk owner and/or should not be assigned responsibility for managing specific risks or categories of risk, because: a) It places the leader in a conflict of interest with his/her/their other roles. 
b)	The leader may put too much emphasis on these risks to the detriment of ERM. 
c)	The leader may be perceived as biased or incompetent with other risks. d) All of the above. 
e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.117 
25) A risk owner is an executive or a manager who: 
a)	Is best suited for managing one or more individual risks assigned to them. 
b)	Helps the ERM function implement a decentralized model. 
c)	Owns a process that includes risks and risk management activities. 
d)	Sets directions for how a risk should be managed. 
e)	Decides how much risk should be assumed or tolerated. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.117 
26) Continuous improvement is particularly important for risk management because: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	It is a popular total quality management practice. 
b)	Risk management is a discipline that continues to evolve. 
c)	The risk landscape of organizations is ever changing. 
d)	Active monitoring and periodic reviews depend on it. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	b) 
c) 	p.122 
27) Continuous improvement approaches include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Reward and recognition programs 
b)	Active monitoring and periodic reviews 
c)	Management action plans 
d)	Lessons learned 
e)	All of the above 
f)	None of the above 	e) 	p.122-124 
28) Lessons learned as a continuous improvement approach:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Involves going over successes, failures and close calls. 
b)	Applies to all management frameworks and processes. 
c)	Requires a post-mortem analysis of what happened and why. 
d)	Includes information available from internal and external sources. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.124 
29) Risk management framework documentation is important because: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	The style and extent of documentation varies significantly between organizations. 
b)	The documentation should be consistent with other organizational frameworks. 
c)	The documentation provides evidence of what the organization does, which helps demonstrate that it is not negligent or complacent in the event that risks materialize. 
d)	The documentation provides many benefits such as education and training, developing a common understanding, ensuring that practices are repeatable, etc. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.125 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
30) Risk management framework implementations should be managed carefully and strategically because:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Implementing ERM is an important and complex initiative. 
b)	The implementation should be looked upon as a change initiative, which involves different interventions and deliverables for each component of the framework. 
c)	Many organizations experience false starts and implementation failures. 
d)	A combination of strategies are required for successful implementation. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.125-126 
 
 
True or False Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. There is no definitive approach, methodology or guideline that explains how to develop a risk management framework and what its components should include. 	False 	p.92 
2. When designing a risk management framework, a useful approach is to divide components based on whether they are elements of foundation or structure. 	True 	p.93 
3. A risk management framework helps determine the right focus for risk management. 	False 	p.94 
4. A risk management framework helps identify organizational needs and preferences. 	False 	p.94 
5. Strategic risk management is consistent with the COSO ERM framework. 	True 	p.95 
6. Conventional risk management is consistent with the ISO risk management guidelines. 	False 	p.95 
7. The ISO risk management guidelines focus on all types of objectives. 	True 	p.96 
8. The COSO ERM framework focuses on all types of objectives. 	False 	p.96 
9. COSO differentiates its ERM framework from its internal control framework based on that nature of objectives, and by extension the underlying risks associated with them. 	True 	p.96 
10. The GRC model is a risk management framework. 	False 	p.97 
11. The GRC model is similar to a management control framework. 	True 	p.97 
12. Ethics and compliance programs can have undesirable effects on risk management. 	True 	p.97 
13. Siloed risk management entails that the overall management of risks is probably suboptimal and possibly dysfunctional for the organization as a whole. 	True 	p.98 
14. Integrated risk management is the management of risks holistically, using a wellcoordinated approach across the organization. 	True 	p.98 
15. Managing risks holistically means that all risks are identified and managed. 	False 	p.98 
16. Managing risks holistically means managing risks for the organization as a whole, as opposed to managing risks only within individual parts without considering the whole. 	True 	p.98 
17. Risk management integration requires distinct management structures. 	False 	p.98 
18. Siloed risk management may lead to distinct risk cultures within an organization. 	True 	p.98 
19. Frameworks must be designed either on the basis or principles or rules. 	False 	p.99 
20. Frameworks can be designed on the basis of principles, rules or a combination of both. 	True 	p.99 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
21. A principles-based risk management framework states the objectives or outcomes to achieve, but does not prescribe the approaches or methods to follow. 	True 	p.99 
22. A rules-based risk management framework prescribe approaches and methods to follow, leaving little room for interpretation or judgement. 	True 	p.100 
23. A capability model is both a diagnostic tool and a planning tool. 	True 	p.100 
24. A repeatable process is one that can be reapplied by the same individuals. 	False 	p.101 
25. A repeatable process should result in a similar outcome irrespective of who applies it. 	True 	p.101 
26. Risk management capabilities are normally the same for every type of risk. 	False 	p.102 
27. It is necessary to maintain the same level of capability for every type of risk. 	False 	p.102 
28. More structure and formality are required for achieving higher capability levels. 	False 	p.102 
29. Risk management cannot mature without the right foundations and structures. 	True 	p.103 
30. Capacity and capability are criteria that guide risk management framework design. 	False 	p.103 
31. Subservience means that a risk management framework is useful and not self-serving. 	True 	p.103 
32. Responsiveness means that a risk management framework is flexible and adaptable. 	False 	p.103 
33. Scalability means that a risk management framework is flexible and adaptable. 	True 	p.103 
34. Leadership is the main influencer of risk culture. 	True 	p.104 
35. Risk management policies and procedures are the main influencers of risk culture. 	False 	p.104 
36. ERM function mandate, leadership, reporting relationships, and resources allocation are key indicators of senior management commitment to risk management. 	True 	p.105 
37. Risk culture indicators exist across all components of the risk management framework. 	True 	p.106 
38. It is the responsibility of the ERM function to define and manage risk culture. 	False 	p.105 
39. A mission outlines a mandate or raison d’être (justification for existence). 	True 	p.107 
40. A mission defines a desirable future state that the organization wants to achieve. 	False 	p.107 
41. A vision defines a desirable future state and provides inspiration. 	True 	p.107 
42. Capability models are useful for defining a mission, vision and outcomes for ERM. 	True 	p.107 
43. The purpose and outcomes of ERM can be defined using smart objectives. 	False 	p.107 
44. An ERM charter is not required (is irrelevant) if there is an ERM policy. 	False 	p.108 
45. ERM functions benefit from having professionals of different backgrounds. 	True 	p.109 
46. Continuing education and training are essential for all professions, and especially for risk management because it is an evolving discipline with a very broad scope. 	True 	p.110 
47. Risk management frameworks should include a communication plan. 	True 	p.111 
48. Communication and consultation are an integral part of the risk management process. 	True 	p.111 
49. Written communications have more richness of content than verbal communications. 	False 	p.112 
50. Internal and external channels of communication can be formal and informal. 	True 	p.112 
51. Websites, wikis, webcasts and social media are examples of formal communications. 	False 	p.112 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
52. Informal channels of communication are relevant for risk management. 	True 	p.122 
53. Adopting a common language for risk management refers to the use of English. 	False 	p.113 
54. Adopting a common language for risk management implies that concepts and risk categories are defined, documented for reference, communicated and well understood. 	True 	p.113 
55. Fear and futility are the top two barriers affecting open communications. 	True 	p.113 
56. Fear and complacency are the top two barriers affecting open communications. 	False 	p.113 
57. A risk oversight structure includes a risk management committee. 	False 	p.115 
58. A risk management structure includes a risk oversight committee. 	False 	p.115 
59. The ERM leaders or equivalent has ultimate responsibility for ensuring that risks are appropriately managed, in accordance with directions and stakeholder expectations. 	False 	p.116 
60. Risk oversight is the governance that boards of directors exercise for risk management. 	True 	p.114 
61. ERM services should be delivered using a centralized model because it works better. 	False 	p.117 
62. ERM services can be delivered using a centralized or decentralized model. 	True 	p.117 
63. A decentralized model for ERM results in greater uniformity in the application of ERM. 	False 	p.117 
64. A centralized model for ERM allows greater empowerment in the application of ERM. 	False 	p.117 
65. Ideally, the ERM leader should not be assigned responsibility for managing specific risks or categories of risk, because it places the leader in a conflict of interest. 	True 	p.117 
66. Risk management committees are useful only if ERM is decentralized. 	False 	p.118 
67. Risk owners are the executives or managers best suited for managing individual risks in accordance with directions from the board and senior executives. 	True 	p.117 
68. The assignment of risk ownership is not essential for effective risk management. 	False 	p.117 
69. Risk ownership should always be assigned to a specific person for better accountability. 	True 	p.118 
70. Risk management is a standalone process or activity. 	False 	p.119 
71. Risk management needs to be embedded in every other process or activity. 	True 	p.119 
72. Risk management integration works best when the integration points and mechanisms used are the ones already in place for integrating organizational functions and units. 	True 	p.119 
73. Risk management frameworks require distinct integration mechanisms. 	False 	p.119 
74. The goal of continuous improvement is perfection (never achieved but always sought). 	True 	p.112 
75. Active monitoring is the ongoing surveillance of risks to measure their significance. 	False 	p.122 
76. Every component of the risk management framework, and every step of the risk management process, include activities and results that can be actively monitored. 	True 	p.123 
77. A periodic review can be applied to the management of specific risks. 	True 	p.122 
78. The analysis of lessons learned focuses on failures and how to prevent them. 	False 	p.124 
79. Lessons learned are available from internal and external sources. 	True 	p.124 
80. Risk management framework documentation is useful but not necessary. 	False 	p.125 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
81. Risk management framework documentation is an investment that provides many benefits, including evidence that the organization is not negligent or complacent. 	True 	p.125 
82. Risk management framework documentation includes the main deliverables or outputs produced for each component of the framework (e.g. an assessment of risk culture). 	True 	p.125 
83. Few ERM implementations initiatives fail when the framework is documented. 	False 	p.125-126 
84. Many organizations experience challenges when trying to implement ERM. 	True 	p.125 
85. ERM implementation should be treated as a change initiative or program. 	True 	p.125 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 4  
Risk Management Process 
 
 
Review Questions 
 
1. Nature of processes 
 
a)	What is a management process?   (p.140) 
A management process can be defined as a series of related activities that are carried out systematically to achieve a particular result.  Process activities are normally organized in a sequence. The activities can be further broken down into sub-activities or steps also in sequence. Management processes are illustrated using diagrams or flowcharts, also known as process maps. 
 
b)	What are process owners, and what are they responsible for?   (p.140) 
Management processes normally have a designated process owner, who is a senior executive  [or senior manager] responsible for ensuring that a process meets organizational needs and performs well, in harmony with other processes. Process owners make changes to processes in consultation with senior management. In doing so, they adopt proven concepts and guidance available from relevant management disciplines. 
 
2. Risk management process overview 
 
a)	Define what is a risk management process.   (p.141) 
A risk management process can be defined as a sequence of activities that identify,  analyze and prioritize risks, develop responses to risks, and monitor and report results.  
 
b)	What are the activities included in a risk management process?   (p.142) 
1.	Context analysis 
2.	Risk identification 
3.	Risk analysis 
4.	Risk assessment 
5.	Risk evaluation 
6.	Risk response 
7.	Monitoring and reporting 
 
c)	Why are the activities [of the risk management process] presented in a sequence?   (p.141 When designing a risk management process, a useful approach is to consider the sequence of activities that are needed to manage risk effectively (…) The circular flow of the diagram reinforces the ongoing nature of risk management.  Every activity builds upon the preceding one, and the process is reapplied on a regular basis over time. 
 
3. Risk management process attributes 
 
a)	Explain the difference between process scalability and modularity.   (p.142) 
Given the need to apply risk management at different organizational levels, and to involve various participants at different times, a risk management process needs to be scalable in scope and modular in approach. Scalability is the ability to apply something at varying scales of magnitude. Modularity is the degree to which components [elements or process activities] can be separated into modules [separate parts], applied and recombined. 
b)	Why are scalability and modularity essential for risk management processes?   (p.143) Process scalability and modularity are essential for large organizations that want to achieve risk management integration and optimization. Scalability and modularity are accommodated by using a generic risk management process that is clear, well understood, and broken down into manageable activities. Such activities can be allocated to different people and carried out across the organization at different levels. This approach ensures that significant risks are not overlooked. 
 
c)	What is the difference between objective-centric and risk-centric perspectives?   (p.143-144) 
•	Objective-centric perspective – risks are identified in relation to what the organization is trying to achieve. It helps ensure that attention is placed on the most relevant risks. 
•	Risk-centric perspective – risks are identified and presented without a clear reference or linkage to objectives. It is often driven by issues [symptoms of risks that have materialized]. 
 
d)	What often happens with a risk-centric perspective?   (p.144) 
Risk-centric perspectives are not leading edge, and are often driven by issues. An issues-driven perspective is a tendency to identify risks on the basis of known issues or problems, rather than uncertainties that can affect the achievement of objectives. This approach results in a disparate list of issues or problems presented as risks, often with limited interest to senior management and board members in the context of ERM. Risk management professionals must remain vigilant at these tendencies and behaviors. They are signs that risk management lacks focus and maturity. 
 
4. Risk management process attributes - Attention to bias 
 
a)	What are the negative implications of cognitive and behavioral biases?   (p.144) 
•	Biases have many negative implications for risk management. They are a kind of risk [source of risk] that directly affects risk management. Biases can make organizations complacent, cause them to overlook or misunderstand risks, and limit their ability to make good decisions. 
•	Biases interfere with how risk information is sought and perceived, whether people are at ease to speak their mind, how risk analysis is done, whether risks are appropriately assessed, how risk management decisions are made, whether these decisions are sound, etc. 
 
b)	Briefly explain two types of biases.   (p.145) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Confidence bias - Making judgmental errors by being overly optimistic and not inquisitive 
•	Availability bias - Making judgments based on the most recent or readily available info 
•	Anchoring bias - Fixating on initial information and not considering changes that occur 
•	Confirmation bias - Paying more attention to info that is consistent with what we believe 
•	Fear of reprisal - Avoiding to mention risks that could potentially upset other people 
•	Illusion of control - Assessing risks lower if they are perceived to be more controllable 
•	Feeling of dread - Assessing risks higher if they are less understood and feared more 
•	Groupthink - Bending to group pressures that discourage dissent or reward consensus 
•	Dominant persons - Giving in to dominant personalities in order to avoid potential arguments 
•	Herding bias - Following a leader when it no longer seems to be the right thing to do 
•	Commitment bias - Sticking with a decision even after it becomes clear that it is not right 
•	Hindsight bias - Falsely thinking that an outcome could have been predicted accurately 
 
5. Context analysis 
 
a)	What does context analysis mean?   (p.146) 
Context analysis involves clarifying the focus and scope of risk management, and developing an understanding of the [internal and external] environmental conditions affecting the organization.  With ERM, the focus is on the goals, strategies and objectives of the organization, and the scope is the entire organization. Clarifying the focus also includes confirming risk appetite and tolerance. The environmental conditions are the factors and forces affecting the organization. Emphasis should be placed on emerging risks and disruptive trends that can undermine the organization. 
 
b)	What are the four major steps of context analysis?   (p.146) Context analysis can be completed in four major steps:  
•	Confirming the objectives 
•	Analyzing the environment 
•	Asking the right questions 
•	Incorporating stakeholder perspectives 
 
c)	What is a common model for analyzing external context?   (p.147-148) 
A	common model for analyzing external context is the PESTEL acronym, which stands for political, economic, social, technological, environmental [physical environment] and legal factors. 
 
d)	What categories can be used for the analysis of internal context?   (p.148) 
A	model for analyzing internal context is the SSPPIT acronym, which stands for strategy, structure, process, people, information and technology. This model has many versions, which may also include size and complexity, along with assets, resources or capital. 
 
6. Risk identification - Approaches 
 
a)	What is a top down approach for risk identification?   (p.151) 
A	top-down approach involves consulting senior executives as a first step, to validate organizational objectives and to identify the most important risks [namely those that can materially affect the organization] before managers and employees are consulted at large. 
• Risks are identified by senior executives and communicated across the organization 
 
b)	What is a bottom up approach for risk identification?   (p.151) 
A	bottom-up approach involves consulting managers and employees at large to identify risks as a first step, and subsequently validating the risks with senior executives. 
• Risks are identified by managers and employees, then validated with executives 
 
c)	Outline the differences, advantages and limitations of both approaches.   (p.151) 
Top-Down ApproachBottom-Up Approach
Description:Description:
•	Risks are identified by senior executives, • Risks are identified by managers and and communicated across the organizationemployees, then validated with executives
Conditions:Conditions:
•	Requires senior executive engagement• Requires more time and effort to carry out
Advantages:Advantages:
•	Facilitates an objective-centric perspective• Much wider reach to obtain information
•	Greater attention to disruptive trends• Raises risk management awareness
•	Better focus on risks of strategic importance• More focus on operational risks
Limitations:Limitations:
•	Provides limited views from the front line• Tends to have an issues-driven perspective
•	May overlook or downplay internal risks• May create a lengthy process of limited value
•	Senior executives may be time pressured• Typically lacks focus on emerging risks
 
 
 
7. Risk identification - Methods 
 
a)	What are the seven methods of risk identification?   (p.152-153) 
•	Data analysis 
•	Documentation review 
•	Process analysis 
•	Strategic analysis 
•	Employee surveys 
•	Individual and group interviews 
•	Facilitated workshops 
 
b)	Which ones are more evidence-based versus opinion-based?   (p.152-153) 
•	Data analysis - evidenced-based 
•	Documentation review - evidenced-based 
•	Process analysis - evidenced-based 
•	Strategic analysis - depends on the source of information used 
•	Employee surveys - opinion-based 
•	Individual and group interviews - opinion-based 
•	Facilitated workshops - opinion-based 
 
c)	Which method has important limitations and why?   (p.153) 
Employee surveys [using questionnaires or polling methods] have  important limitations.  For instance, response rates may be low, and responses are limited to the questions asked, which may or may not be clear to those surveyed. Moreover, responses may not be obtained from the individuals solicited. For example, executives and senior managers have a tendency to delegate survey responses to their staff. 
 
8. Risk identification - Challenges 
 
a)	Explain how issues should not be confused as risks.   (p.154) 
Many times, issues are confused as risks. Although most issues are symptoms of risks, they should not be mistaken for risks. For example, employee turnover may be an issue, and an indicator of risk. However, the risk underlying turnover should probably be defined as employee engagement. Turnover may result from a lack of engagement, but employees who stay with the organization also may not be engaged. Alternatively, turnover may be driven by other factors such as restructuring and the implementation of new technologies, in which case turnover as a risk (or indicator of risk) can be skewed. Similar to the medical profession, risk management must avoid confusing symptoms with conditions. 
 
b)	Explain how deficient management practices should not be confused as risks.   (p.154) Deficient management practices and controls are also confused as risks. For example, not monitoring inventory levels, or not keeping computer equipment in secured facilities are not risks. However, lost sales due to insufficient inventory, and low productivity due to computer failures are risks. These risks are mitigated by monitoring inventory levels, and keeping computer equipment secured. Organizations that define risks on the basis of deficient management practices and controls are issues driven. They may focus on compliance to policies and procedures, but they are not focused on managing uncertainties. 
 
 
 
 
 
9. Risk analysis 
 
a)	What is the purpose of risk analysis?   (p.155) 
Risk analysis is developing an understanding of risks and measuring their significance.  It provides the information needed for risk assessment, evaluation and response.   Risk analysis includes developing estimates for impact and likelihood, identifying  the sources and causes of risks, and identifying mitigating factors and controls. It also includes examining the linkages and effects of risks on objectives. In addition, risk analysis examines the relationships and interdependencies between risks, namely how they may influence or trigger other risks, leading to cascading and compounding effects. 
 
b)	Briefly explain how risk analysis techniques can be categorized.   (p.157) 
Risk analysis techniques can be divided in four broad categories. Some techniques examine the effects and consequences of risks. Other techniques identify the sources and causes of risks, and are known as root cause analysis techniques. Risk analysis techniques can also be quantitative or qualitative based on their approach and results. Quantitative techniques are adapted for risks that are more easily measurable. Qualitative techniques are better suited for analyzing risks that require more of a judgmental approach for estimating impact and likelihood. 
 
c)	Provide one technique example for each category. 
Students may choose from the following: 
	Five Why’s Technique	Brainstorming	Risk Interaction Maps
	Qualitative	Fishbone Diagram	Benchmarking	Scenario Analysis
	Techniques	Hazard and Operability	Bowtie Diagrams	Game Theory
	Studies (HAZOP)	Delphi Technique	Business Impact Analysis
	Event Tree Analysis*	Modeling and Simulation
	Decision Tree Analysis*	• Sensitivity Analysis
	Quantitative 	Fault Tree Analysis*
	Failure Modes and	• Stress Testing
	Techniques	Empirical Observations†
	Effects Analysis*	• Value at Risk
	Statistical Analysis‡	• Monte Carlo Simulation
	Sources and Causes of Risk	Effects and Consequences of Risk
 
 
10. Risk assessment 
 
a)	What are the two main risk assessment methods?   (p.159) 
Risk assessment is normally done through surveys, workshops or a combination of both. 
 
b)	Which method is preferable and why?   (p.159) 
Risk assessment workshops offer significant advantages over surveys, and are usually the preferred method for conducting risk assessments. One or more workshops can be conducted with selected groups of executives and managers across the organization, and the risk assessment results can be amalgamated. Workshops enable participants to discuss the risk information and exchange their views. When participants are from different organizational areas, they bring diverse perspectives that help identify interdependencies between risks. These perspectives create a better understanding of risks and contribute to a more informed assessment. They also benefit risk management integration by shedding light on the full spectrum of risks, and building consensus on the most significant risks, taking into account the relationships between risks. 
 
 
c)	What are the two ways to display the assessment of individual risks?   (p.162) 
Risk assessment results are typically displayed in a matrix when the significance of risks is determined strictly on the basis of impact and likelihood. A table format is usually the preferred alternative if additional criteria are part of the assessment. 
 
d)	What is a portfolio perspective in the context of risk management?   (p.162) 
In the context of risk management, a portfolio perspective can be defined as a composite or aggregate view of all risks, which facilitates the management of risks on an integrated basis.  
 
11. Risk evaluation 
 
a)	What is risk evaluation?   (p.164) 
Risk evaluation is the comparison of risk significance with criteria to determine if risk levels are acceptable or need to be altered.  
 
b)	What is the purpose of risk evaluation?   (p.164) 
The purpose of risk evaluation is to identify individual and aggregate levels of risk that are inconsistent with expectations, and either excessive or insufficient for optimal results. Risk evaluation therefore brings to light the levels of risk that are of greatest concern. In doing so, risk evaluation identifies priorities for managing risks. (…) Risk evaluation may also indicate whether a risk should have been assumed or tolerated in the first place. 
 
c)	What is a common approach for evaluating individual risks?   (p.165) 
A common approach for evaluating individual risks is to define risk appetite and risk tolerance in relation to the impact and likelihood criteria, and to overlay the evaluation criteria on a risk map. Most organizations consider that the zone of greatest significance on their risk map reflects levels of residual risk that are not acceptable. By adopting this rule, they implicitly define their risk appetite through the impact and likelihood scales and definitions, and how they choose to position the zones of significance that appear on their risk map. 
 
d)	Why is this common approach not suitable for evaluating aggregate levels of risk?   (p.165) Risk maps are a first step for evaluating individual risks. However, they provide a one size fits all approach that may not be suitable for every risk. For example, an organization may be willing to accept a higher level of significance for selected risks if the cost of risk reduction is prohibitive in relation to the benefits of achieving a lower level of risk. Accordingly, each risk must be examined to determine if it requires a distinct risk appetite and tolerance for optimal results. Exceptions should be allowed because each risk and category of risks have distinct risk-reward relationships. Risk maps should therefore be used with caution when evaluating individual risks. 
 
12. Risk response 
 
a)	What is risk response?   (p.167) 
Risk response is the process of making decisions regarding the significance of risk and implementing those decisions. It is also known as risk treatment.   
 
b)	What is the purpose of risk response?   (p.167) 
The purpose of risk response is to alter levels of risk that are inconsistent with risk appetite and risk tolerance, and incompatible with optimal risk-reward. 
 
c)	What are the main decision-making factors for responding to risks?   (p.168) The main decision-making factors for responding to risks are the: 
1)   Significance of risks in relation to risk appetite and risk tolerance 2)   Extent that risk levels are incompatible with optimal risk-reward 
3)	Causes of the risks 
4)	Resources and capabilities of the organization 
5)	Costs, implications and timelines of the solutions 
6)	Predictability of the solution outcomes 
7)	Nature of the involvement that an organization wants to have with risk 
 
d)	Explain how the total cost of risk affects risk-reward relationships.   (p.168) 
The cost of managing risks and the cost of assuming risks and  affect risk-reward relationships. Assuming insufficient or excessive levels of risk both increase the total cost of risk. Managing the total cost of risk to the optimal point reduces to the total cost of risk and maximizes risk-reward.  
 
 
13. Monitoring and reporting 
 
a)	What is monitoring?   (p.172) 
Monitoring is a risk control technique that detects situations, events or conditions in order to take corrective action before issues or problems arise. 
 
b)	What is active monitoring?   (p.172) 
Active monitoring is the ongoing surveillance and analysis of activities, risks and results, to determine if they are as intended or as expected. It identifies fluctuations, variances, deviations, discrepancies, anomalies and their causes. Active monitoring is done using indicators and parameters that track activities, risks and results on an ongoing basis. 
 
c)	Describe the four broad areas of monitoring in the context of risk management.   (p.172) Monitoring activities can be grouped in four broad areas, namely the monitoring of context, and the monitoring of risks, responses to risks and risk management performance. 
Context 	Risk Responses 
Approach: Monitor and analyze the external and internal environment of the organization.  
Purpose: Discover changes that can affect the organization. Determine if the risk profile continues  to be valid or needs an update. Also determine if  risk-reward relationships have shifted, and whether risk appetite and tolerance should be revisited. 	Approach: Monitor the implementation of risk management responses and their effects. 
Purpose: Ensure that implementation of the risk management responses is progressing as planned. Ensure that the responses are carried out and have the desired effects. Determine if course corrections  or adjustments are required and make decisions. 
Risks 	Risk Management Performance 
Approach: Use indicators, targets and thresholds  for monitoring components of risks and levels of risk. 
Purpose: Detect risks and take corrective action where appropriate. Determine if levels of risks are consistent with expectations. Ensure that risks are managed in accordance with policies and directions such as risk appetite targets and tolerance limits. 	Approach: Measure the effectiveness of processes, methods, actions and controls for managing risks. 
Purpose: Remain alert to performance issues and continuously improve risk management. Monitor the total cost of risks and the benefits of assuming risks. Identify deficiencies and find solutions. Analyze successes and failures, and learn from experience. 
 	 
d)	What seven principles should be met for reporting risk information?   (p.173-174) 
•	Maintain quality information 
•	Understand user needs 
•	Focus on what really matters • Keep it clear and concise 
•	Adopt a user friendly format 
•	Explain the information 
•	Continuously improve 
 
e)	Explain the differences between a dashboard and a scorecard.   (p.174) 
•	Dashboard - Status reports are known as dashboards when they are designed similarly to an indicator or control panel. By contrast, performance reports include information on the effectiveness of risk management processes, actions and controls.  
•	Scorecard - Performance reports may be referred to as scorecards, especially if they measure performance in relation to objectives and indicators, akin to the balanced scorecard concept. 
 
f)	What is the purpose of a dashboard?   (p.174) 
Dashboards are typically an extension of risk profiles and risk management action plans. The purpose of dashboards is to update senior management and board members on the status of risks and risk responses. Dashboards typically provide a snapshot of current levels of risks based on risk assessments and indicators of risk. They can also signal if risk levels are inconsistent with risk appetite and tolerance. 
 
 
Other Short Answer Questions 
 
1.	Explain why it is beneficial to differentiate risk assessment from risk evaluation.   (p.142) Many organizations do not differentiate the assessment of risk significance versus the evaluation of risk against criteria such as risk appetite and tolerance to determine priorities. However, it is generally considered a better approach to make this differentiation given the importance of defining risk appetite and tolerance, and evaluating the significance of risks against pre-established criteria. 
 
2.	Explain why risk management process activities must be rigorous right from the start.   (p.143) A chain is only as strong as its weakest link. Processes are particularly vulnerable to this fundamental principle because they are a sequence of activities. Every activity of the risk management process depends on the preceding one. For instance, if risks are overlooked they will not be analyzed, and risks that are overlooked or not properly analyzed cannot be well prioritized. Ultimately, it is not possible for the risk management process to be effective unless every activity is equally effective. It is therefore essential to apply a rigorous approach from the start, and maintain it all the way to the end. 
 
3.	Explain the importance of reliable information in the context of risk management.   (p.144) Like any other process, the risk management process cannot produce good results without quality inputs. These inputs are the information sources and methods for collecting and generating risk information. Examples include historical data, observations from managers and staff, knowledge acquired through experience, stakeholder feed-back, estimates and forecasts developed using statistical analysis and modeling, expert opinions, etc. (…) The greater the risk, the more effort should be spent on obtaining reliable information. (…) The reliability of risk information should be monitored, and the methods and techniques updated where appropriate. 
 
4.	Outline two approaches that help overcome risk management biases.  (p.145) Textbook examples: 
•	Strong risk management framework with emphasis on leadership and culture. 
•	Continuously seeking information that challenges current beliefs. 
•	Hiring external experts that can constructively challenge assumptions and beliefs. 
Note:  Expert advice - Box 4.1:  Students may select from the box. 
5.	Why is it important to document context analysis and how can it be done?   (p.146) 
Context analysis should be documented for reference and communicated to those participating in risk identification. The documentation takes the form of a context paper that serves as a briefing document. The purpose of a context paper is to clarify the focus and scope for applying the risk management process, and outline key elements to consider for risk identification. 
 
6.	Who are the external and internal stakeholders that should be consulted as part of context analysis in preparation for risk identification?   (p.149) 
•	External stakeholders are the individuals and entities that are not part of the organization, but who influence the organization and are affected by what it does. They include investors such as shareholders, lenders, contributors and donors. They also include labor unions, customers, suppliers, governments, regulators, communities, interest groups and the general public. 
•	Internal stakeholders are the individuals that are part of the organization. They include board members (or equivalent), senior executives, managers and staff. It is normal practice to consult internal stakeholders when analyzing organizational context. In addition to their own views, they can provide insight on the views of external stakeholders due to their interactions with them. 
 
7.	Explain the purpose of risk identification and the output produced.   (p.150) 
•	Purpose - ascertain the risks that can affect the achievement of objectives, and develop a comprehensive list of those risks. Such a list is called a risk universe, namely an inventory of all the important risks, grouped into meaningful categories and sub-categories. 
•	Output - a risk identification report, where risks are defined in statements, grouped in categories and sub-categories (key risk areas), and tiered for analysis. Risk identification reports are normally validated with senior executives before risk analysis begins. 
 
8.	Explain why maintaining a broad perspective for risk identification is important.   (p.150) Although it is not feasible to try to identify all risks, appropriate effort is needed to identify all important risks, namely the ones that can materially affect the organization. (…)  It is therefore essential not to limit discussions as part of risk identification efforts, even if it is understood that some risks will not be identified, namely those that are unknown and unforeseeable. 
•	Needs to consider all organizational levels. 
•	Risks originate inside and outside organizations. 
•	Risk identification covers all categories of risks.  
•	Risks include known and emerging risks.  
•	Risk may be controllable or not controllable. 
•	Risk may present opportunities or threats. 
•	Risk may be desirable or undesirable. 
 
9.	Explain the difference between an important risk, a significant risk and a strategic risk.  (p150) 
Important risk - a risk that can materially affect the organization. (p.150) 
Significant risk - a risk that is assessed as a high impact and/or high likelihood.  (p.65) 
Strategic risk - a risk that is associated with the soundness and/or implementation of strategies. (p.57) 
 
10.	Explain what is a hybrid approach for risk identification.   (p.152) 
A comprehensive approach for risk identification combines the top-down and bottom-up approaches. This combination is commonly known as a hybrid approach, which provides greater assurance that all important risks are identified. (…) As a general rule, organizations should begin with the topdown approach to ensure that an objective-centric perspective is established from the start, and that senior management concerns are not overlooked early in the process. Afterward, it is useful to consult managers and employees at large, and additional risks may be identified as a result. 
 
 
 
11.	What is the difference between quantitative and qualitative risk analysis techniques?  (p.157) 
Quantitative techniques 
•	Adapted for risks that are more easily measurable [for measuring impact and likelihood]. 
•	Quantitative risk analysis involves coming up with estimates of impact and likelihood using empirical observations and mathematical formulas. The estimates are typically expressed as a dollar amount for impact, and a probability for likelihood. 
Qualitative techniques 
•	Better suited for analyzing risks that require more of a judgmental approach for estimating impact and likelihood.  
•	Qualitative risk analysis involves estimating impact and likelihood judgmentally. 
 
12.	What are the similarities between quantitative and qualitative risk analysis techniques?  (p.157) 
•	Both take into account the sources of risks and causes when estimating impact and likelihood.  
•	Both take into account the mitigating factors, actions and controls (when assessing residual risk).  
•	Both inform risk assessments that use rating scales and definitions for determining the significance (impact and likelihood) of risks. 
 
13.	Explain what is a risk register.   (p.156) 
A risk register refers to the computer application and format that are used to record and store risk information. The content of a risk register is similar to the content of a risk analysis template. It also includes additional information such as the risk assessment, the risk appetite and tolerance, responses to risks, indicators of risk, monitoring activities, etc. The format of a risk register is normally represented as a table with multiple columns and rows. (…) A risk register supported by a database software is a powerful tool for risk management integration. It is possible to create a  risk register in a table format using a word processing or spreadsheet software, although a database software provides much better linkage, sorting and retrieval capabilities. 
 
14.	What are the caveats of quantitative risk analyses?  (p157) 
•	Some organizations have a culture that may be described as quantitative enthusiasm, while others have a culture of quantitative skepticism. Need to adapt risk analysis to organizational culture. 
•	Risk analysis only provides estimates. Organizations must be careful not to develop a false sense of security through numbers, and remember that a wide range of outcomes is possible.  
•	The use of sophisticated techniques may not be worth the effort, especially if there is limited reliable information, or if there is already considerable knowledge of the risk. 
•	The ultimate tests are whether more analysis can alter risk management decisions, and whether the benefits of the altered decisions are greater than the costs of the analysis. 
 
15.	What is a risk profile?   (p.159) 
A risk profile is an overview of risks. It is developed at the entity level (for the entire organization), and it can also be developed for individual management functions, business units, initiatives, projects, etc. Risk profiles include the risk information applicable to individual risks, the assessment of the risks, and one or more composite (aggregate) views of risks. 
 
16.	What are the limitations of risk assessment surveys?   (p.161) 
•	Individuals doing the assessment may not be sufficiently knowledgeable. 
•	Individuals do not benefit from the discussions that occur in a workshop. 
•	Response rates can be low 
•	Responses may not necessarily come from those solicited 
•	Large sample sizes tend to cluster risk assessments, making it difficult to identify  (single out) the most significant risks 
 
 
 
17.	What are the benefits of risk assessment workshops?   (p.161) 
•	Enable participants to discuss the risk information and exchange their views 
•	Participants bring diverse perspectives that help identify interdependencies between risks 
•	Better understanding of risks contributes to a more informed assessment 
•	Benefit risk management integration by shedding light on the full spectrum of risk and  
•	Building consensus on the most significant risks, taking into account relationships between risks 
 
18.	Explain how risk maps are a first step or method for evaluating individual risks.   (p.165) A common approach for evaluating individual risks is to define risk appetite and risk tolerance in relation to the impact and likelihood criteria, and to overlay the evaluation criteria on a risk map. Most organizations consider that the zone of greatest significance on their risk map reflects levels of residual risk that are not acceptable. By adopting this rule, they implicitly define their risk appetite through the impact and likelihood scales and definitions, and how they choose to position the zones of significance that appear on their risk map. When the rule is adopted thoughtfully, it becomes an explicit statement of risk appetite. Risk appetite can therefore be indicated as a line that appears on a risk map. Risk tolerance can also be indicated on a risk map by creating a zone above and/or below the risk appetite, depending on whether the risks are threats or opportunities. By adopting this method, risk maps can be used to evaluate individual risks (using a one size fits all approach). 
 
19.	Explain the limitations of using risk maps for risk evaluation purposes.   (p.165) 
Risk maps are a first step for evaluating individual risks. However, they provide a one size fits all approach that may not be suitable for every risk. For example, an organization may be willing to accept a higher level of significance for selected risks if the cost of risk reduction is prohibitive in relation to the benefits of achieving a lower level of risk. Accordingly, each risk must be examined individually to determine if it requires a distinct risk appetite and tolerance for optimal results. Exceptions should be allowed because each risk and category of risks have distinct risk-reward relationships. Risk maps should there-fore be used with caution when evaluating individual risks. 
 
20.	Describe what is a risk management action plan and is responsible for it.   (p.171) 
A risk management action plan includes the actions for improving risk management frameworks and capabilities, and for implementing risk responses. The risk responses are presented in a distinct section of the action plan. The ERM function owns the risk management action plan. It is responsible for providing advice, support and oversight for the implementation of the risk management responses. The information included in a risk management action plan should include the following: 
•	a brief overview of each action or response, including its rationale 
•	the costs and benefits anticipated from implementing each action or response 
•	the implementation approach, resources, timeline and critical milestones 
•	the person responsible for leading the implementation of each action or response 
•	the integration, sequencing and critical path of the actions and responses 
•	the approach for resolving issues, and for monitoring and reporting progress 
 
21.	What are the various forms of monitoring and how often is it carried out?   (p.172) 
Forms of monitoring include scanning, observing, tracking, measuring, testing, and overseeing activities, risks and results.  (…) Monitoring can be ongoing, periodic or ad hoc, depending on whether it is carried out on a continuous basis, periodically or only when events take place or various conditions are met.  
 
 
 
 
 
Multiple Choice Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. A management process is best defined as: 
a)	A diagram, flowchart or process map that is documented for reference. 
b)	A series of related activities carried out systematically to achieve a particular result. 
c)	A process assigned to a manager who is responsible and accountable for it. 
d)	A flowchart accompanied with policies, procedures, guidelines and methodologies. 
e)	An administrative procedure used for implementing a methodology. 	a) 	 
2. Management processes have a process owner because someone needs to: 
a)	Ensure that it meets organizational needs and performs well. 
b)	Consider how to improve it based on proven concepts and relevant guidance. 
c)	Make changes to it in consultation with senior management. d) All of the above. 
e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.140 
3. A risk management process can be defined as: 
a)	A management framework or activity intended for managing risks. 
b)	A sequence of activities that identify, analyze and prioritize risks. 
c)	A systematic application of risk management policies and procedures. 
d)	A set of principles for risk identification, assessment and prioritization. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	f) 	p.140-141 
4. A risk management process can be defined as: 
a)	A management framework or activity intended for managing risks. 
b)	A sequence of activities that identify, analyze and prioritize risks, develop  responses to risks, and monitor and report results. 
c)	A systematic application of risk management policies and procedures. 
d)	A set of principles for risk identification, assessment and prioritization. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.140-141 
5. Process modularity is: 
a)	The degree to which process activities can be separated, applied and recombined. 
b)	The modeling of a process using a computer application or software. 
c)	The ability to apply process activities at varying scales of magnitude. 
d)	The sequencing of process activities in circular flow that forms a model. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.142 
6. Process scalability is: 
a)	The degree to which process activities can be separated, applied and recombined. 
b)	The leveling of a process into activities and sub-activities. 
c)	The ability to apply process activities at varying scales of magnitude. 
d)	The definition of risk components in ways that facilitate risk management. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.142 
7. An objective-centric perspective means that: 
a)	The organization has defined its ERM mission, vision, outcomes and objectives. 
b)	A management by objectives approach is used for planning purposes. 
c)	Risk are identified in relation to what the organization is trying to achieve. 
d)	Resources are allocated to the most significant risks impacting objectives. 
e)	The risk management function maintains its focus on achieving objectives. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.143 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
8. A risk centric-perspective means that: 
a)	Risk identification is centered on all categories of risk affecting the organization. 
b)	The organization has a definitive process in place for risk management. 
c)	Risk management maintains a focus on all sources of risk affecting outcomes. 
d)	Resources are allocated to the most significant risks impacting the organization. 
e)	The risk management function has the right focus for identifying uncertainties. f) 	None of the above. 	f) 	p.144 
9. A confidence bias is: 
a)	Following a leader when it no longer seems like the right thing to do. 
b)	Making judgmental errors by being overly optimistic and not inquisitive. 
c)	Sticking with a decision even after it becomes clear that it is not right. 
d)	Having too much confidence on risk analysis, assessment and evaluation. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.145 
10. A groupthink bias is: 
a)	Giving in to dominant personalities in order to avoid potential arguments. 
b)	Bending to group pressures that discourage dissent or reward consensus. 
c)	Avoiding to mention risks that could potentially upset other people in the group. 
d)	Working in a group and not thinking about the organization as a whole. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.145 
11. Context analysis involves:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Clarifying the focus and scope of risk management, and developing an understanding of the environmental conditions affecting the organization. 
b)	Confirming risk management objectives, analyzing risk management actions,  asking questions, and incorporating stakeholder perspectives. 
c)	Developing a context paper that outlines risks and risk management priorities. d) All of the above. 
e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.146-149 
12. Environmental scanning means: 
a)	Examining properties and land to identify environmental hazards. 
b)	Analyzing issues that may affect the environment such as pollution, waste, etc. 
c)	Conducting a context analysis that can be used to document a context paper. 
d)	Analyzing the external and internal environment of the organization. 
e)	Identifying risks and controls that affect the protection of the environment. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.147 
13. The full set of categories commonly used for external context analysis are: 
a)	Political, economic, strategic, financial, technological, legal 
b)	Strategy, structure, process, people, assets, information, technology 
c)	Political, economic, social, technological, physical environment, legal 
d)	Strategic, operational, financial, compliance and reporting 
e)	Known risks, undesirable risks, emerging risks, unknown risks 
f)	None of the above 	c) 	p.148 
14. The full set of categories commonly used for internal context analysis are: 
a)	Strategy, structure, process, people, assets, information, technology 
b)	Size, complexity, strategy, structure, process, information, technology 
c)	Known risks, undesirable risks, emerging risks, unknown risks 
d)	Strategic, operational, financial, compliance, reporting 
e)	Size, strategy, process, people, assets, information, technology 
f)	None of the above 	f) 	p.148 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
15. A key risk area is: 
a)	A risk or a source of risk that is critical to organizational success. 
b)	A risk indicator that is monitored continuously or periodically. 
c)	A risk category that is usually further divided into sub-categories. 
d)	An organizational area that is important for strategic risks. 
e)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.150 
16. Maintaining a broad perspective for risk identification is important because: 
a)	Cognitive and behavioral biases may be present, which need to be addressed. 
b)	The perspectives of external stakeholders are needed for risk identification. 
c)	An objective-centric perspective cannot otherwise be applied for risk identification. 
d)	Top-down and bottom-up approaches should be used for risk identification. 
e)	All important risks that can materially affect the organization should be identified. f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.150 
17. A bottom-up approach for risk identification:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Helps raise risk management awareness across the organization. 
b)	Facilitates the application of an objective-centric perspective. 
c)	Provides more focus on operational risks. 
d)	Requires less time and effort to carry out. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.151 
18. A top-down approach for risk identification:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Helps ensure that senior executive concerns are not overlooked early on. 
b)	Facilitates the application of an objective-centric perspective. 
c)	Provides a better focus on risks of strategic importance. 
d)	Requires less time and effort to carry out. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.151-152 
31) Risk identification methods include the following three: 
a)	Data analysis, process analysis, root cause analysis 
b)	Documentation review, employee surveys, facilitated workshops 
c)	Employee surveys, employee interviews, stakeholder feed-back 
d)	Broad perspective, top-down approach, bottom-up approach 
e)	Context analysis, environmental analysis, strategic analysis 
f)	None of the above 	b) 	p.152 
19. Risk analysis is: 
a)	Developing an understanding of risk and estimating their significance. 
b)	Developing a risk assessment workbook and risk profile. 
c)	Selecting and applying techniques for quantitative or qualitative analysis. 
d)	Filling out the information required for a risk analysis template. 
e)	Measuring the significance of risks to assess their impact and likelihood. 
f)	Developing a model of risk categories and sub-categories. 
g)	All of the above. 
h)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.155 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
20. A risk analysis template is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	A model for presenting risk information in a consistent format. 
b)	A presentation of risk information that facilitates risk analysis and assessment. 
c)	A diagram that is used for the assessment of risk significance. 
d)	A risk analysis technique for developing scenarios of how a risk may evolve. 
e)	An example of a popular risk analysis trend. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.155 
21. A risk register is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	A computer application and format used for the storage of risk information. 
b)	A database that contains information similar to a risk analysis template, but also contains additional information not included in the risk analysis template. 
c)	A workbook that is used for conducting risk assessment workshops. 
d)	A logbook of risk information maintained by risk owners for audit purposes. 
e)	A registry of past risk events that is used to identify lessons learned. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.156 
22. Risk analysis techniques: 
a)	Provide insight for risk assessment and for making risk management decisions. 
b)	Can be mostly quantitative, mostly qualitative, or a combination of the two. 
c)	Focus on sources and causes, effects and consequences, or a combination of the two. d) All of the above. 
e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.157 
23. Risk assessment is: 
a)	Measuring the significance of each risk, comparing the risks with one another,  and developing a risk profile of the organization. 
b)	Comparing the significance of risks with predefined criteria such as impact and likelihood to determine if risk levels are acceptable or need to be altered. 
c)	Measuring the impact and likelihood of risks using risk analysis techniques. 
d)	Determining if residual risk exposures should be further mitigated. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.159 
24. A risk profile is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	An overview of risks developed at the entity level, and possibly for individual management functions, business units, initiatives, projects, etc. 
b)	A workbook as part of risk assessment and evaluation work sessions. 
c)	A document that includes the risk information of individual risks, the assessment of the risks, and one or more composite (aggregate) views of risks. 
d)	A document that describes organizational context in advance of risk identification. e) None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.159 
25. A risk assessment workbook is: 
a)	A document that provides a procedure for risk owners to assess risks. 
b)	A document that outlines the results of a risk assessment work session. 
c)	A document for reviewing risk information and conducting a risk assessment. 
d)	A document that includes the risk profile of an organization.  e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.160 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
26. Risk evaluation is: 
a)	The assessment of impact and likelihood to determine risk significance. 
b)	The comparison of risk significance with pre-established criteria to determine  if levels of risk are acceptable or need to be altered. 
c)	A post-mortem evaluation of risk events to identify lessons learned. 
d)	An assessment of the performance of risk owners in managing risks. 
e)	An audit of the risks assumed for achieving goals, strategies and objectives. f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.142 
p.164 
27. Risk evaluation criteria are: 
a)	Impact and likelihood used to assess the significance of risk. 
b)	Benchmarks or terms of reference against which the significance of risk is evaluated. 
c)	Criteria that can be used in addition to impact and likelihood. 
d)	Criteria used by auditors or evaluators to conduct independent assessments. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.164 
28. Risk evaluation criteria should:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Be developed for all aspects that are necessary for managing risks individually and on an aggregated basis, included for categories of risks and the entire organization. 
b)	Always include vulnerability, readiness, adaptability and recovery. 
c)	Be developed after the risk assessment is completed to determine priorities. 
d)	Be used by the ERM function to identify risk management priorities. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.164 
29. Risk maps can be used for:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Assessing risks for impact and likelihood. 
b)	Outlining a range of possible risk levels and earnings. 
c)	Evaluating individual risks in relation to risk appetite and tolerance. 
d)	Evaluating aggregate levels of risk within each risk category. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.165-167 
30. In the context of risk management, a portfolio perspective is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	A composite or aggregate view of risks that facilitates the management of risks on  an integrated basis, namely by risk category and for the organization as a whole. 
b)	A method for diversifying financial investments such as stocks and bonds. 
c)	A perspective used to identify risks on the basis of organizational objectives. 
d)	An approach for determining how much risk capacity should be assumed. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.162 
31. Portfolio perspectives are essential components of risk profiles because:  
(select all that apply) 
a)	They facilitate the management of risks on an integrated basis. 
b)	They provide an aggregate view of risks for evaluation at the entity level. 
c)	They help determine if overall risk levels are excessive or insufficient. d) All of the above. 
e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.162 
p.166 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
32. Risk response is:   (select all that apply) 
a) The process of making and implementing decisions regarding the significance of risk. b) Also known a risk treatment. 
c)	Applying the risk management process to risks that have been identified. 
d)	Responding to risks that have already taken place. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.167 
33. The purpose of risk response is to:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Alter levels of risk that are inconsistent with risk appetite and risk tolerance. 
b)	Alter levels of risk that are incompatible with optimal risk-reward. 
c)	Ensure that risk the risk management process is applied responsibly. 
d)	Respond to stakeholders who are asking for risk management information. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.167 
34. A risk management action plan:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Includes only the actions related to risk responses. 
b)	Is owned by the risk owners responsible for risk responses. 
c)	Is typically a distinct (separate) document from a business plan. 
d)	Does not require the involvement of the ERM function. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	f) 	p.171 
35. Monitoring is: 
a)	A risk control technique that detects situations, events or conditions in order to take corrective action before issues or problems arise. 
b)	The ongoing surveillance and analysis or activities risks and results to determine if they are as intended or expected. 
c)	The combination of activities that monitor risks and risk responses. d) All of the above. 
e) None of the above.  	a) 	p.172 
36. Monitoring activities can be grouped in four broad areas: 
a)	Risk retention, risk transfer, risk control, risk financing 
b)	Active, Ongoing, Periodic, Ad hoc 
c)	Action plans, reports, dashboards, scorecards 
d)	Context, risks, risk responses, risk management performance 
e)	Scanning, observing, tracking, measuring 
f)	None of the above 	d) 	p.172 
37. Risk reporting is: 
a)	The term that designates the risk and risk management information reported to internal and external stakeholders. 
b)	Risk and risk management information presented in dashboards and scorecards. 
c)	The monitoring of risk and risk management activities using indicators. 
d)	The reporting of risk and risk management information in annual reports. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.173 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
38. The following are three of the seven reporting principles that should be met: 
a)	Use reliable, relevant, useful and timely information. 
b)	Maintain quality information, focus on what really matters, explain the information. 
c)	Understand user needs, adopt a user-friendly format, solicit user feed-back. 
d)	Solicit input, keep it clear and concise, use a dashboard or scorecard. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.173-174 
39. A risk management dashboard is: 
a)	A status report designed similarly to an indicator or control panel. 
b)	A performance report developed in relation to objectives and indicators. 
c)	A report that outlines the risk profile of the organization using diagrams. 
d)	A control panel for the transportation of dangerous goods. 
e)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.174 
 
 
True or False Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Process activities and sub-activities are normally organized in a sequence. 	True 	p.140 
2. Management processes are illustrated using diagrams or flowcharts (process maps). 	True 	p.140 
3. A process owner is responsible for ensuring that a process meets organizational needs and performs well, in harmony with other processes. 	True 	p.140 
4. A process owner is someone assigned responsibilities for managing one or more specific risks based on their knowledge, skills and abilities related to those risks. 	False 	p.140 
5. Management processes normally have a designated risk owner. 	False 	p.140 
6. Management processes normally have a designated process owner. 	True 	p.140 
7. A management process is a series of related activities carried out systematically to achieve a particular result. The activities are normally organized in a sequence. 	True 	p.140 
8. A risk management process is a sequence of activities that identify, analyze and prioritize risks, develop responses to risks, and monitor and report results. 	True 	p.141 
9. A risk management process is a set of components that are interrelated. 	False 	p.141 
10. A modular process involves activities that can be separated, applied and recombined. 	True 	p.142 
11. A modular process involves activities can be applied at varying scales of magnitude. 	False 	p.142 
12. A scalable process involves activities that can be applied at varying scales of magnitude. 	True 	p.142 
13. A scalable process involves activities that can be separated, applied and recombined. 	False 	p.142 
14. A risk-centric perspective is consistent with risk management guidelines. 	False 	p.144 
15. An objective-centric perspective means that risks are identified in relation to what the organization is trying to achieve, namely goals, strategies and objectives. 	True 	p.143 
16. Many organizations do not apply an objective-centric perspective to risk identification. 	True 	p.146 
17. An issues-driven perspective confuses issues or problems as risks. 	True 	p.144 
18. A risk-centric perspective is preferrable to an objective-centric perspective. 	False 	p.143-144 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
19. Risk management is entirely dependent upon reliable sources of information. 	True 	p.144 
20. Expert opinions and judgment are the most reliable source of risk information. 	False 	p.144 
21. Groupthink is working in a group and not considering entity level risks. 	False 	p.145 
22. Groupthink is bending to group pressures that discourage dissent or reward consensus. 	True 	p.145 
23. Confidence bias is following a leader when it no longer seems like the right thing to do. 	False 	p.145 
24. Confidence bias is making judgmental errors by being too optimistic and not inquisitive. 	True 	p.145 
25. Context analysis and environmental scanning are synonymous. 	False 	p.147 
26. There is no definitive approach or methodology for conducting an environmental scan. 	True 	p.147 
27. The output of context analysis is a report that identifies opportunities and threats. 	False 	p.146-147 
28. The output of context analysis is a context paper that serves as a briefing document. 	True 	p.146 
29. Environmental scanning means analyzing the physical environment of organizations. 	False 	p.147 
30. PESTEL is an acronym that refers to categories used for internal context analysis. 	False 	p.147 
31. PESTEL is an acronym that refers to categories used for external context analysis. 	True 	p.147 
32. A risk universe is a report where risks are defined in statements and tiered for analysis. 	False 	p.150 
33. A risk universe is an inventory of risks grouped in categories and sub-categories. 	True 	p.150 
34. It is essential not to limit discussions as part of risk identification efforts. 	True 	p.150 
35. A top-down approach is generally preferrable as a first step for risk identification. 	True 	p.151-152 
36. A bottom-up approach is generally preferrable as a first step for risk identification. 	False 	p.151-152 
37. Applying a top-down approach and as well as a bottom up approach for risk identification provides greater assurance that all important risks are identified. 	True 	p.152 
38. Employee surveys have important limitations for risk identification. 	True 	p.153 
39. Group interviews are both a risk identification and a risk assessment technique. 	False 	p.153 
40. Employee surveys are consistent with a top-down approach for risk identification. 	False 	p.153 
41. Employee surveys are consistent with a bottom-up approach for risk identification. 	True 	p.153 
42. Risk identification interviews should be conducted using detailed questionnaires. 	False 	p.153 
43. Deficient management practices or controls should not be confused as risks. 	True 	p.154 
44. Most management issues are symptoms of risks, but should not be confused as risks. 	True 	p.154 
45. Risk analysis is developing an understanding of risks and estimating their significance. 	True 	p.155 
46. A risk analysis template is a technique for estimating impact and likelihood. 	False 	p.155 
47. A risk analysis template is a model for presenting risk information in a consistent format to facilitate risk analysis and assessment. 	True 	p.155 
48. The content of a risk register is the same as the content of a risk analysis template. 	False 	p.156 
49. Risk registers are best supported by a database software. 	True 	p.156 
50. Understanding the sources and causes of risks, as well as their effects and consequences, help assess the significance or risks, but does not help determine mitigation strategies. 	False 	p.158 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
51. Understanding the sources and causes of risks, as well as their effects and consequences, help assess the significance or risks, and help determine mitigation strategies. 	True 	p.158 
52. Operational and financial risks are easier to quantify than strategic and emerging risks. 	True 	p.158 
53. Quantitative risk analysis involves coming up with estimates of impact and likelihood using empirical observations and mathematical formulas. 	True 	p.157 
54. Qualitative risk analysis involves estimating impact and likelihood judgmentally. 	True 	p.157 
55. Understanding the sources and causes of risks provides insight on the potential effects and consequences of risks, and the likelihood of these outcomes. 	True 	p.158 
56. Understanding the sources and causes of risks does not provides insight on the potential effects and consequences of risks, and the likelihood of these outcomes. 	False 	p.158 
57. Risk assessment is measuring the significance of each risk, comparing the risks with one another, and developing a risk profile of the organization. 	True 	p.159 
58. Risk assessment is the comparison of risk significance with criteria to determine if risk levels are acceptable or need to altered. 	False 	p.159 
59. A risk profile is an overview of risks developed at the entity level, and possibly for individual management functions, business units, initiatives, projects, etc. 	True 	p.159 
60. A risk profile includes the risk information of individual risks, the assessment of the risks, and one or more composite (aggregate) views of risks. 	True 	p.159 
61. Risk assessment normally focuses on inherent risk to assess the significance of risk. 	False 	p.159 
62. Risk assessment normally focuses on residual risk. 	True 	p.159 
63. It can be argued that only risks that are inherently significant are singled out during risk identification, because any other risk does not in fact merit much attention. 	True 	p.160 
64. The most common risk assessment criteria are impact and likelihood, although additional criteria may be used to complement the assessment of risk significance. 	True 	p.160 
65. Risk assessment is measuring the significance of each risk, comparing the risks with one another, and developing a risk profile of the organization. 	True 	p.159 
66. As a general rule, all risks that are important or critical for organizational success should be assessed, but only if it is believed that they are not already well mitigated. 	False 	p.161 
67. As a general rule, all risks that are important or critical for organizational success should be assessed, regardless of whether they may already be well mitigated or not. 	True 	p.161 
68. Workshops are preferrable to surveys for risk assessment purposes. 	True 	p.161 
69. Surveys are preferrable to workshops for risk assessment purposes. 	False 	p.161 
70. An expected value is the sum of each possible value multiplied by its probability. 	True 	p.163 
71. An expected value is the gain anticipated from managing a portfolio of investments. 	False 	p.163 
72. A value at risk is a measurement of the value that can be lost over a defined period of time based on a probability distribution 	True 	p.163 
73. A value at risk is the loss anticipated if financial investments or assets underperform. 	False 	p.163 
74. The main criteria for evaluating risks are risk appetite and risk tolerance. 	True 	p.164 
75. The main criteria for evaluating risks are impact and likelihood. 	False 	p.164 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
76. Risk evaluation is the responsibility of the ERM function and risk owners. 	False 	p.164 
77. Risk evaluation is the responsibility of senior executives and risk owners. 	True 	p.164 
78. Risk evaluation criteria should be reexamined prior to commencing risk evaluation. 	True 	p.165 
79. Risk owners are responsible for seeking directions on risk appetite and tolerance for the risks assigned to them. Those directions come from boards of directors or equivalent. 	True 	p.165 
80. Risk owners set risk appetite and tolerance for the risks assigned to them. 	False 	p.165 
81. Risk maps are a first step (or method) for evaluating individual risks, but they provide a one size fits all approach that may not be suitable for every risk. 	True 	p.165-166 
82. Risk maps can be used for evaluating aggregate levels of risk. 	False 	p.165-166 
83. Portfolio perspectives are useful but not necessary for risk evaluation. 	False 	p.165-166 
84. Portfolio perspectives are essential components of risk profiles. 	True 	p.166 
85. Risk response is making decisions regarding the significance of risk and implementing those decisions. 	True 	p.167 
86. Risk response is applying the risk management process to the risks identified. 	True 	p.167 
87. The purpose of risk response is to alter levels of risk that are inconsistent with risk appetite and risk tolerance and incompatible with optimal risk-reward. 	True 	p.167 
88. The purpose of risk response is to ensure that the risk management process is applied responsibly and that it is responsive to stakeholder expectations. 	False 	p.167 
89. A lot of organizations  fail to realize the full benefits of ERM by not following through their risk assessment and evaluation with concrete decisions and actions. 	True 	p.167 
90. Risk identification, analysis and assessment are the more difficult steps of the risk management process. Making decisions and implementing solutions is a lot easier. 	False 	p.167 
91. Risk management techniques associated with risk control or risk transfer are not necessarily exclusive and are often used in combination. 	True 	p.170 
92. Risk management techniques associated with risk control or risk transfer are usually exclusive and rarely used in combination. 	False 	p.170 
93. Organizations select risk management techniques that provide the best overall solution that fits their context, needs and preferences. 	True 	p.170 
94. Risk owners are responsible for leading the implementation of the risk management responses applicable to the risks assigned to them. They are also accountable for ensuring that the risk management responses are implemented successfully. 	True 	p.171 
95. The ERM function is responsible for leading the implementation of risk responses. 	False 	p.171 
96. A risk management action plan includes the actions for improving risk management frameworks and capabilities, and for implementing responses to risks. 	True 	p.171 
97. Monitoring and reporting are often presented as activities that end the risk management process, however, they are in fact embedded throughout the risk management process. 	True 	p.171 
98. Monitoring is the ongoing surveillance and analysis of activities, risks and results to determine if they are as intended or as expected. 	False 	p.172 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
99. Risk reporting is the term that designates the risk and risk management information communicated to internal and external stakeholders. 	True 	p.172 
100. Risk reporting includes reports developed during the risk management process  and at the completion of the risk management process. 	True 	p.174 
101. Dashboards are performance reports that may also be referred to as scorecards. 	False 	p.174 
102. Dashboards are status reports, and scorecards are performance reports. 	True 	p.174 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 5  
Risk Response 
 
 
Review Questions 
 
1. Risk management responses 
 
a)	What is risk response?   (p.202) 
Risk response is the process of making decisions regarding the significance of risk and implementing those decisions. It is also known as risk treatment.   
 
b)	What is the purpose of risk response?   (p.202) 
The purpose of risk response is to alter levels of risk that are inconsistent with risk appetite and risk tolerance, and incompatible with optimal risk-reward. 
 
c)	Provide an overview of risk management responses and techniques using a table.   (p.202) 
Involvement 	Risk Management Techniques 
Risk  
Avoidance 	Avoid a risk by not having any involvement with the activities giving rise to the risk. e.g. decision to not pursue an opportunity; decision to avoid or abandon activities 
 	Risk Control Techniques 	Risk Financing Techniques 
Risk  
Retention 	Assume a risk by managing activities and financing uncertainties associated with the risk. 
	Manage activities 
e.g. monitor, accept, reduce likelihood,  reduce impact, change context, exploit 	Fund uncertainties 
e.g. cash, revolving loans, reserves, program funds, natural hedging, self-insurance 
Risk 
Transfer 	Assume a risk but transfer some activities or uncertainties associated with the risk. 
	Transfer activities 
e.g. incorporation, contracting, outsourcing, franchising, leasing, joint ventures 	Transfer uncertainties 
e.g. insurance, surety agreements, derivative instruments (futures, forwards, options, swaps) 
 	 
2. Risk avoidance 
 
a)	What is risk avoidance?   (p.202) 
Risk avoidance is the absence of involvement with activities that create risks, or the withdrawal from such activities. Risk avoidance is an informed decision,  not one that happens randomly or without much thought. 
 
b)	What are the two types of risk avoidance?   (p.202) 
There are two types of risk avoidance decisions, namely deciding not to assume risk in the first place (proactive avoidance), and deciding to eliminate a direct or indirect involvement with activities or uncertainties that create risk (reactive avoidance or abandonment). 
 
c)	Are risk avoidance decisions always obvious? Please explain.   (p.202) 
In some cases, risk avoidance decisions are obvious and do not require analysis. At times however, risk avoidance requires careful consideration, and the right decision may not be evident. For example, an organization may fail to recognize that some threats can be turned into opportunities. In addition, an organization may not be willing to abandon activities that are no longer profitable, even when it is clear that the business model for those activities cannot be transformed to create value. Risk avoidance decisions therefore include important strategic, operational and financial considerations. 
d)	What conditions cause organizations to avoid risks?   (p.203) 
Conditions that Cause Organizations to Avoid Risks 
	The risk is not (or is no longer) compatible with organizational goals, strategies and objectives. 
	The risk is not within the capacity or capability of the organization and cannot be transferred. 
	The risk exposure or the residual risk is excessive and cannot be reduced cost-effectively. 
	The risk-reward relationship applicable to the risk is not favorable and cannot be transformed. 
	The risk presents a significant threat that cannot be turned into an opportunity. 
	There is no strategic or competitive advantage that can be gained by assuming the risk. 
	The risk is undesirable and unnecessary in the context of the organization. 
 	 
e)	What is the general rule for not avoiding risks?   (p204) 
As a general rule, organizations should not avoid risks that they can naturally assume for creating value and developing a competitive advantage. Risks should not be avoided when they are a good strategic fit, are consistent with risk appetite, create value by being assumed, and can be managed cost-effectively using reliable techniques. 
 
3. Risk retention 
 
a)	What is risk retention?   (p.204) 
Risk retention is the direct involvement with the activities and uncertainties associated with risk. It implies assuming a risk by maintaining ownership of the activities and uncertainties applicable to that risk, and realizing the potential benefits or losses from that risk.  
 
b)	When is risk retention a preferred response?   (p.204) 
Risk retention is the preferred response when a risk can be managed and funded cost-effectively without the use of external parties such as contractors and insurers. In some cases, risk retention may be the only option for risks that have to be assumed. In other cases, retention can be the most economical solution, even when risk transfer techniques are available.  
 
c)	Describe the main characteristics of risk retention.   (p.204-205) 
Characteristics 	Description 
Planned 
Unplanned 	 Risk is assumed consciously and deliberately, with a clear plan and strategy.  Risk is assumed inadvertently or informally, without a clear plan or strategy. 
Complete 
Partial 	 The activities and uncertainties associated with a risk are fully retained.  Some activities or uncertainties associated with a risk are transferred. 
Funded 
Unfunded 	 Identifiable funds are set aside or available through financing arrangements.  No specific funds or financial arrangements are allocated for risks assumed. 
 	 
4. Risk transfer 
 
a)	What is risk transfer?   (p.205) 
Risk transfer is the assignment of activities or uncertainties to an external party who is willing to accept the risks associated with the activities or uncertainties transferred. Risk transfer is also known as risk sharing.   
 
b)	What does risk transfer imply?   (p.205) 
It implies transferring activities or uncertainties using contracts.  
 
 
 
c)	How is risk transfer different from risk avoidance?   (p.205) 
Risk transfer is not risk avoidance because there is a risk that the external party may not perform as expected. In this case, the risk transfer is not as intended, and the situation may revert to risk retention. 
 
d)	Why is risk transfer never complete?   (p.205) 
Risk transfer is never complete because of the possibility that an external party may not meet its obligations.  
 
5. Retention and transfer considerations 
 
a)	What three conditions should be met for risk retention?   (p.206) 
•	The risk can be owned naturally for a competitive advantage 
•	The risk is controllable, or can at least be monitored satisfactorily 
•	A cost-effective management control framework can be implemented 
 
b)	What four conditions should be met for risk transfer?   (p.206) 
•	Favorable terms and conditions can be negotiated with an external party 
•	The external party is reliable and the transfer contract is enforceable 
•	The financial markets are efficient for the risk transfer solution 
•	There is an ability to monitor the external party and resolve disputes 
 
c)	Explain the risk management response matrix.   (p.207) 
 	
High Impact / Low Likelihood:
Risks in this quadrant are unlikely to occur but they can have dramatic consequences. They include risks associated with worst case scenarios and risks that are insurable such as natural disasters and accidents. Making the organization resilient and using risk transfer techniques are often preferred solutions for managing these risks.	High Impact  / High Likelihood:
Risks in this quadrant are often of a strategic nature. They are either avoided or actively managed using a combination of techniques that reduce both likelihood and impact. Activities and uncertainties associated with these risks should be transferred if they do not provide a strategic advantage, and if they can be transferred cost-effectively.
Low Impact / Low Likelihood:
Risks in this quadrant are typically routine operational risks that are easy to manage. In some cases, these risks are simply accepted as a normal course of business and are not actively managed because the cost of risk management exceeds the benefits. These risks should be monitored to ensure that they remain insignificant.	Low Impact  / High Likelihood:
Risk in this quadrant are usually known and foreseeable. They include most opera tional risks that are internal to organizations. Although these risks have a low impact, they can present a huge challenge if they occur too frequently. These risks can usually be managed effectively using risk control techniques that focus on prevention.

Impact
 
-
 
Likelihood
 
d)	How are risk interdependencies relevant for risk responses?   (p.207) 
Risks have interdependencies that create cascading and compounding effects. The most effective risk management techniques target the causes of risk, including the risks that have a propensity to cause other risks. 
 
e)	Why are safety margins important?   (p.208) 
When deciding on risk responses, it is important to consider if the solutions provide an adequate margin of safety in the event of worst case scenarios. Although worst case scenarios are unlikely, they can have devastating effects if they happen. Safety margins make organizations resilient. 
f)	Where should safety margins be applied?   (p.208) 
Organizations need to determine where safety margins are needed. Safety margins are factored into risk appetite and tolerance. For instance, organizations set their risk appetite at levels that do not exceed their capacity. They also assume and retain risks only if they have the right capabilities for doing so. However, safety margins also need to be built-in management processes and risk responses. For example, if an organization places too much reliance on a single risk management technique, it may in fact be assuming risks greater than its risk appetite.  
 
6. Risk control 
 
a)	What is risk control?   (p.209) 
Risk control is the management of activities involving risks, or the transfer of such activities to external parties who accept responsibility for the activities under a contract.  
 
b)	Explain how risk control applies to activities transferred?   (p.209) 
When activities are transferred, contractors have to be managed to ensure that they perform in accordance with requirements. The transfer of activities simply shifts the approach for risk control. If an organization performs activities for itself, it needs to manage the risks associated with those activities. However, if an organization transfers activities, it needs to manage contractual risks to ensure that the activities are carried out, and that the goods or services are obtained satisfactorily. 
 
7. Retention of activities – Monitor risks 
 
a)	What is monitoring?   (p.209) 
Monitoring is a risk control technique that detects situations, events or conditions in order to take corrective action before issues or problems arise. As such, monitoring examines if risks and levels of risks are consistent with expectations. 
 
b)	What are forms of monitoring?   (p.209) 
Forms of monitoring include scanning, observing, tracking, measuring, testing and overseeing activities, risks, responses and performance. Monitoring is often done using indicators that help detect risks, measure and compare levels of risk, and make decisions about risk responses. 
 
c)	Why is monitoring one of the most widely used retention technique?   (p.209) 
Monitoring is perhaps the most widely used risk response technique because it is normally applied to all significant risks on an ongoing basis. Monitoring is also done for examining the effectiveness of risk responses.  
 
d)	Give two examples of risk monitoring.   (p.209) 
Examples include keeping track and analyzing workplace injuries, employee departures, business interruptions, computer downtime, network access, product defects and customer complaints. At a more strategic level, examples include monitoring and analyzing competitors, industry trends, economic indicators, interest rates, currency exchange, proposed changes to laws and regulations, and the evolution of disruptive trends such as artificial intelligence and robotics. 
 
8. Retention of activities – Accept risks 
 
a)	What is risk acceptance?   (p.210) 
Risk acceptance means not taking action or not taking further action for managing risks. It is an informed decision, not a situation that happens as a result of ignorance or complacency. 
 
 
b)	What are the three mains cases of risk acceptance?   (p.210) 
•	Negligible risks accepted without treatment or additional treatment. 
•	Risk levels are acceptable and no further action is applied. 
•	Additional responses are either not effective or not value added. 
 
c)	Explain the risk control aspect in risk acceptance.   (p.210) 
•	Risk acceptance occurs at the point where no additional response is implemented.  
•	The risk control aspect in risk acceptance involves determining at what point a risk should be 
accepted and acting accordingly. 
 
d)	Give two examples of risk acceptance.   (p.210) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Declining the purchase of an extended warranty for vehicles and equipment. 
•	Declining insurance coverage for certain types of losses. 
•	Not installing back-up generators to prevent power outages.  
•	Making investments and operating in countries where political risks are significant. 
•	Tobacco companies accepting that their products may be subject to health related lawsuits. 
 
9. Retention of activities – Reduce likelihood or impact 
 
a)	What are the main techniques for reducing likelihood or impact? 
• 
• • 
• 	Preparation 
Prevention 
Detection 
Protection 	• 
• 
• 	Deterrence 
Duplication 
Diversification 	• 
• 
• 	Separation 
Suppression 
Containment 
 
b)	Briefly explain two techniques and provide an example for each.   (p.210-211) Students may choose from the following: 
Technique 	Description 
Preparation 	Reduce the impact of risk by planning how to react to events if they occur. 
e.g., business continuity plan, disaster recovery plan, crisis management plan 
Prevention 	Prevent risk by addressing the causes or eliminating the sources of risk.  
e.g., employee training, preventive maintenance, information privacy policy 
Detection 	Prevent risk or limit their impact by detecting issues or problems early. 
e.g., equipment inspection, review of accounts, analysis of customer complaints 
Protection 	Reduce the likelihood and impact of risk by protecting people and assets. 
e.g., building security, network access control, protection of intellectual property 
Deterrence 	Prevent risk by deterring individuals and organizations from taking action. 
e.g., surveillance cameras, theft prosecution, price reductions to deter competition 
Duplication 	Lessen the impact of risk by creating alternative arrangements or methods. 
e.g., back-up systems, dual plant locations, alternate product delivery methods 
Diversification 	Reduce risk by diversifying assets, activities, products or services. 
e.g., investment portfolio diversification, product and market diversification 
Separation 	Limit the impact of risk by isolating, separating or dispersing assets or activities. e.g., isolation of laboratories and computer rooms, offsite data storage 
Suppression 	Lessen the impact of risk by eliminating or reducing their potential effects. 
e.g., automated shut downs, fire sprinkler systems, defective product recalls 
Containment 	Reduce the impact of risk by containing their effects and consequences. 
e.g., chemical spill containment, quarantine of livestock, bank failure bailouts 
 	 
10. Retention of activities – Change context 
 
a)	What is the changing context risk response?   (p.212) 
Changing context involves substantially altering the risk profile of an organization. It may be done proactively in anticipation of uncertainties, or reactively in response to events. (…) Changing context redefines how an organization carries out its activities, how much risk it is willing to assume, or what it is trying to achieve. It can be done for assuming less risk or more risk. It can also be done for assuming different risks or assuming risks differently. 
 
b)	What is the distinctive feature of the changing context risk response?   (p.212) 
The distinctive feature of the change context technique is the scale of the transformation and the extent of the risk profile modification. When a response is highly transformative and substantially alters the risk profile, it is considered to be a change of context.  
 
c)	What are the four techniques for changing context?   (p.212-213) 
•	Change goals and objectives 
•	Change strategies 
•	Change risk appetite or tolerance 
•	Change business model 
 
d)	Explain the change business model technique and give an example.   (p.213) 
•	Explanation - Change the approach for carrying out activities to produce goods or services, or make them available. Make important changes to management systems, processes and methods that change how things are done in response to risks. 
•	Examples - Grocers and retailers that develop e-commerce delivery and pick-up arrangements in order to compete with companies such as Amazon and EBay. Governments that implement healthcare reforms to provide better coverage. 
 
11. Retention of activities – Exploit risks 
 
a)	What is the exploiting risk response?   (p.213) 
Exploiting risks is taking advantage of desirable risks that present opportunities for reward. It is the flipside of risk avoidance and the active side of risk acceptance. 
 
b)	What are the five techniques for exploiting risks?   (p.214) Increase, Accelerate, Defer, Experiment, Screen 
 
c)	Explain the experiment technique and give an example.   (p.214) 
•	Explanation - Experiment with opportunities and risks before making important decisions or commitments. Gauge risk-reward relationships by modifying variables and measuring the effects. Conduct trials or tests before reaching conclusions. 
•	Examples - Obtain a demonstration from vendors before making decisions on new equipment or computer software. Measure the price-demand elasticity of products by putting them on sale for short periods of time. Conduct research and clinical trials before making prescription drugs available to the public. 
 
12. Transfer of activities 
 
a)	What reasons do organizations have for transferring activities to external parties?   (p.215) Organizations have many reasons for wanting to transfer activities to external parties. These reasons include facilitating growth, reducing costs, making use of the expertise of other organizations, obtaining a better product or service, and staying focused on other activities considered more strategically important. By transferring activities, organizations do not have to assume the risks of carrying them out. They can focus on managing other activities and risks. 
b)	What are the six techniques for transferring activities?   (p.215-216) Incorporation, contracting, outsourcing, franchising, leasing, joint ventures 
 
c)	Explain outsourcing as a risk transfer technique [and provide an example].   (p.216) 
•	Explanation - Activities that an organization already does can be transferred by outsourcing them to service providers, resulting in the organization no longer having to do the activities for itself. The service providers are contractors that typically produce or distribute products for the organization, or provide services to the organization or its customers. The service providers are independently owned. 
•	Examples - Soft drink producers such as Coca-Cola and Pepsi outsource some production and distribution of soft drinks to bottling companies as part contract agreements. These companies are located in different regions of the world. Coca-Cola and Pepsi also have bottling plants that they own and operate. 
 
13. Risk financing 
 
a)	What is risk financing?   (p.217) 
Risk financing is the funding of uncertainties, or the transfer of uncertainties to external parties who accept responsibility for the funding of uncertainties based on a contract.  
 
b)	What is the main purpose of risk financing?   (p.217) 
The main purpose of risk financing is to mitigate the financial effects of risk by ensuring that funds are available to absorb or offset these effects. Accordingly, risk financing is generally used to mitigate risks that pose a financial theat. 
 
c)	What are the benefits of risk financing?    (p.217) 
•	Protect from catastrophic losses that can threaten organizational survival 
•	Reduce the variability of cash flows and earnings, and makes them more predictable.  
•	Achieve greater financial stability and lower cost of capital (predictable cash flows). 
•	Improve financial leverage and borrowing ability (predictable cash flows). 
•	Comply with legal and contractual obligations (e.g. insurance requirements). 
 
d)	Explain the scope of risk financing.   (p.217-218) 
Every organization uses risk financing techniques, depending on whether they retain or transfer uncertainties. The retention [and funding] of uncertainties (complete or partial) applies to every type of risk that organizations assume, whether the risks are strategic, operational, or financial. The transfer of uncertainties is mostly limited to hazard risks and selected financial risks.  
 
14. Funded retention 
 
a)	What is funded retention?   (p.218) 
Funded retention implies that identifiable funds are set aside or available through financing arrangements for absorbing the financial loss that may occur as a result of a risk. By contrast, unfunded retention occurs when no specific funds or financing arrangements are allocated to cover for a financial loss, in which case the loss is absorbed through regular operating funds. 
 
b)	What is natural hedging? Explain it with an example.   (p.220) 
Natural hedging refers to instances where organizations offset the financial effects of risks as part of their regular operations. The most common example relates to currency exchange. An organization that sells products and services in U.S. dollars does not have currency exchange risks if it pays its employees, suppliers, long term debts and income taxes also in U.S. dollars. However, many organizations operate internationally, and a substantial portion of their revenues and expenses are in different currencies. Organizations have currency exchange risk whenever there is an imbalance between the amounts collected in a given currency versus the amounts paid using the same currency. The risk exposure is proportionate to the imbalance, and it is affected by the volatility of the foreign currency relative to the domestic currency of the organization. 
c)	What is self-insurance and its purpose?   (p.220) 
Self-insurance is a planned and formal approach to retain, manage and fund hazard risk exposures. The purpose of self-insurance is to lower the cost of hazard risks by absorbing losses instead of paying for insurance.  
 
d)	What are contingent capital arrangements?   (p.221) 
Contingent capital arrangements are financing agreements that provide debt or equity funding only if specified risks materialize. The risk events are referred to as contingencies. Contingent capital arrangements can be established to fund losses from a natural disaster, or fund additional costs incurred as a result of commodity price increases.   
 
e)	Describe how a contingent capital arrangement works.   (p.221) 
•	Contingency funding is available if a specified risk event occurs and results in losses above a predefined threshold (e.g. loss exceeds $5M). The contingency funding becomes available at the agreed terms and conditions, which include a predefined limit (e.g. max funding of $20M). 
•	Contingency funding can be used at the discretion of the organization that obtains (pays for) 
the arrangement. The organization has the right, but not the obligation to use the funding. 
 
15. Insurance arrangements 
 
a)	What is insurance?   (p.221) 
Insurance can be defined as a contractual agreement whereby an insured client pays a fee to an insurer, in return for compensation in the event of specified losses. The fee is called the insurance premium. The contractual agreement is called the insurance policy.  
 
b)	What are the four principles of insurance?   (p.223) 
•	Insurability - likelihood can be estimated with reasonable accuracy, random event, measurable loss in dollars, definite time and place, ability to spread across many clients 
•	Interest of clients - must suffer a portion of the loss (deductible, loss limit) 
•	Rule of indemnity - cannot be compensated for more than the loss 
•	Law of large numbers - vast amount of historical data to estimate events and losses 
 
c)	What are the four types of insurable losses?   (p.224) 
•	Property losses - physical assets, intangible assets, money, information 
•	Personnel losses - employee death, injury illness, or disability 
•	Liability losses - legal claims originating from internal or external stakeholders 
•	Income losses - diminished revenues cause by acts of nature of accidents 
 
d)	What are the five types of insurance plans?   (p.225-226) 
•	Guaranteed cost insurance 
•	Large deductible plan 
•	Retrospective rating plan 
•	Excess and umbrella liability insurance 
•	Reinsurance 
 
e)	Briefly describe insurance-linked securities.   (p.227) 
Insurance-linked securities are securities that provide superior returns unless specified hazard risk events take place, in which case the returns can be substantially reduced. The most prevalent kind of insurance-linked security is a catastrophe bond. The issuers of catastrophe bonds accept to pay the buyers a superior rate of interest. In turn, the buyers accept the risk that the interest may not be paid, and that portions of the principal may not be reimbursed in the event of a loss. The types of losses covered, and the terms and conditions for the interest and principal payments are outlined in the security agreement. Insurance-linked securities can be issued privately to large institutional investors such as pension funds and investment funds, or they can be issued publicly and traded on exchanges like any other negotiable security such as stocks and bonds. 
16. Surety agreements 
 
a)	What are surety agreements?   (p.226) 
A surety agreement is a contract where an organization accepts, in return for a fee, to compensate another organization in the event that a third party fails to meet an obligation or performance requirement. The organization that accepts the risk of compensation is called the surety. It is usually a bank or insurance company. The organization that obtains the compensation is called the obligee. It is the organization to which the obligation or performance requirement is due. The third party that is required to meet the obligation is called the principal or obligor. 
 
b)	Illustrate the interactions of the participants in a surety agreement. 
 
 
17. Derivative instruments 
 
a)	What is a derivative and how does it work in general?   (p.228) 
A derivative is a contract that derives its value from an underlying asset or condition, because it sets a price and terms, for an exchange that will take place in the future. The market price fluctuations of the underlying asset, and/or the changes in conditions that take place after the contract is agreed, give rise to a positive or negative value for the derivative. 
 
b)	What are the most common types of derivative instruments?   (p.228) 
The different types of derivative contracts are called derivative instruments, or simply derivatives. The most common derivatives are forwards, futures, options and swaps.  
 
c)	What are the characteristics and advantages of forwards and futures?   (p.230) 
ForwardsFutures
Characteristics:Characteristics:
•	Based on agreements that are • Based on standardized contracts customized to organizational needsthat are developed by exchanges
•	Negotiated between organizations • Traded on exchanges or with a financial institution• Settlement guaranteed by exchanges
•	Usually settled at the expiration date• Usually closed out prior to expiration
Main advantages:Main advantages: 
•	Adaptable to organizational needs• More actively traded and more liquid
•	Can be for almost any underlying asset• More easily closed out or settled in cash
•	Less basis risk (better match to needs)• Less counterparty credit risk
 
 
d)	What is a call option? 
•	An option is a contract that gives the holder (buyer) a right to buy or a right to sell an asset during a period of time, for a price that is agreed at the present time. The agreed exercise price of the option is called the strike price. 
•	A call option is an option that provides the buyer of the option a right to buy an asset at the strike price during a specified period. A put option is an option that provides the buyer of the option a right to sell an asset at the strike price during a specified period. 
 
e)	Describe a call option from the perspective of the buyer and seller.   (p.232) 
Call option - Right to Buy 	
Buyer of a call option 
-	pays a fee to the seller of the call option 
-	will exercise the right to buy the underlying asset  if strike price < market price 
-	profits if (market price - strike price) > fee paid 
-	may be mitigating or speculating a price increase 	Seller of a call option 
-	collects a fee from the buyer of the call option 
-	hopes that the market price ˂ strike price 
-	profits if fee > (market price - strike price) - typically speculating a price decrease 
 	 
f)	What are swaps and why do organizations use them?   (p.233) 
•	A swap is a contract to exchange cash flows during a period of time, in accordance with terms that are agreed at the present time. The contract defines the dates when the cash flows are exchanged and how the amounts are calculated.  
•	Swaps are similar to forward contracts. The main difference is that a forward has one specific date for the exchange, whereas a swap involves multiple exchange dates during an agreed upon period. Swaps can be described as a combination, or a series of forward contracts. 
•	The most common swaps are interest rate swaps and currency swaps.  
•	Swaps are normally used to achieve a better matching of incoming and outgoing cash flows that are based on fixed versus variable interest rates, or that are based on different currencies.  
•	The main reason why organizations enter into swap agreements is to achieve a better matching of their revenues and expenses.  
 
18. Hedging considerations 
 
a)	What are the important aspects to consider when making hedging decisions?   (p.236-237) • Natural ownership of risks 
•	Benefits of maintaining predictable cash flows 
•	Size and certainty of risk exposures 
•	Suitability of derivative instruments 
•	Counterparty and liquidity risks 
•	Complexity of derivative strategies 
•	Industry practices 
 
b)	Explain the suitability of derivative instruments consideration.   (p.236) 
Suitability of derivative instruments – Derivative instruments available through exchanges are standardized. The underlying assets, quantities and timelines may not be consistent with organizational needs, which create basis risk. For instance, airlines often hedge the price of jet fuel using oil derivatives, because jet fuel derivatives are not actively traded. This practice is known as cross-hedging, namely using an underlying asset that is different but correlated. 
 
 
 
 
Other Short Answer Questions 
 
1.	Briefly explain the differences between risk avoidance, risk retention and risk transfer.   (p.202) Avoidance - Avoid a risk by not having any involvement with the activities giving rise to the risk.   
Retention - Assume a risk by managing activities and financing uncertainties associated with the risk. Transfer - Assume a risk but transfer some activities or uncertainties associated with the risk. 
 
2.	Explain how responding to risks is typically an iterative process.  (p.205) 
Responding to risk is typically an iterative process. It involves deciding if risk exposures and residual risks are acceptable, implementing responses, monitoring the effectiveness of the responses, and making adjustments that may include additional responses. 
 
3.	What sort of factors have to be considered when making risk response decisions?   (p.205) Many factors have to be considered when making risk responses decisions. These factors include the significance of risks, the extent that risk levels are incompatible with optimal risk-reward, the causes of risks, the resources and capabilities of the organization, the cost of the solutions and their implications and timelines, and the predictability of outcomes. 
 
4.	What factors should be considered when deciding to retain or transfer risks?   (p.206) 
Decisions 	Factors to Consider 
Retention and/or Transfer 		Relevance of retention or transfer to organizational goals and strategies 
	Expectations of key stakeholders regarding risk retention or transfer 
	Experience of the organization with risk retention or transfer techniques 
	Costs, implications and benefits of risk retention or transfer 
	Timelines for the risk retention or transfer techniques to take effect 
	Effectiveness and predictability of the risk retention or transfer techniques 
	Compatibility of the retention or transfer with other risk management actions 
	Ability to develop integrated solutions for managing risks holistically 
 	 
5.	What are examples of risk control techniques?   (p.202, 209) 
•	Manage activities -  monitor, accept, reduce likelihood,  reduce impact, change context, exploit 
•	Transfer activities - incorporation, contracting, outsourcing, franchising, leasing, joint ventures 
•	Risk control includes techniques such as monitoring risks, accepting risks without taking action  (or additional action), and reducing the likelihood or impact of risks by preventing their causes or limiting their effects. Risk control techniques also include changing organizational context and exploiting risks to achieve better results. In addition, risk control techniques include managing contracts related to the activities transferred to external parties to ensure contract performance. 
 
6.	Explain reducing likelihood and reducing impact as risk control techniques.   (p.210) 
•	Reducing likelihood - means implementing actions and controls that prevent risks from occurring. These actions and controls are directed at the causes and sources of risks.  
•	Reducing impact - involves implementing actions and controls that lessen the outcomes of risk. These actions and controls are directed at the effects and consequences of risk.  
 
7.	Explain how changing strategies can be a risk control technique and give an example.   (p.212) 
•	Explanation - Change context by changing strategies to achieve goals and objectives differently by influencing or altering risk-reward relationships. Shifts in strategy include innovation, expansion, differentiation, diversification, automation, vertical integration, retrenchment, etc. 
•	Example - The decision by European auto maker Volvo to phase out combustion-only engines by 2019, and offer only electric and hybrid vehicles in response to growing environmental concerns, consumer demand and emission regulations.  
 
8.	Explain how screening can be a risk control technique and give an example.   (p.214) 
•	Explanation - Exploit risks by screening (selecting or rejecting) opportunities using criteria and analytical methods. Separate the most promising opportunities from those less enviable. 
•	Example - Evaluate contracting opportunities before submitting bids. Develop business cases to analyze investment opportunities. Screen vendors to ensure that they meet social responsibility and ethical standards. Develop recruiting methods to select job applicants. 
 
9.	What is contract management   (p.215) 
Contract management is ensuring that a contractor delivers goods or services in accordance with agreed terms and conditions. It includes defining requirements, evaluating proposals, managing relations, providing information, approving plans or budgets, monitoring the activities and results, making payments to the contractor, and resolving performance issues or disputes. 
 
10.	What aspects are important as part of contract negotiations?   (p.215) 
When negotiating a contract, both parties need to ensure that they do not assume risks that are disproportionate to the benefits obtained. They also have to make sure that they do not assume risks that they cannot control. In addition, they need to assess whether the other party is reliable and capable of fulfilling its obligations. Both parties come to agreement if the terms and conditions of the contract are acceptable to them, and if they are satisfied that the other party will meet its obligations. In order to alleviate their doubts, both parties can negotiate guarantees and indemnifications. 
 
11.	Explain franchising as a risk transfer technique and provide an example.  (p.216) 
•	Explanation - Organizations use franchises to transfer responsibilities to franchise owners who purchase contractual rights to operate a business that sells products or services under the brand name of the seller of franchises (franchisor). The franchisor directs what franchise owners can do and how they operate. Franchise owners operate in accordance with rules set by the franchisor. • Examples - Franchises are common in the retail industry. Fast-food brands such McDonald’s, Subway, Pizza Hut and Tim Hortons use franchises. Automobile dealerships are normally franchises. Hilton and Marriott franchise hotels. 
 
12.	What are hazard risks and what are their distinctive features?   (p.218) 
•	There is no universal definition of hazard risks.   
•	Hazard risks are risks related to acts of nature, accidents and crime. They include damages caused by fire, flooding, windstorms and earthquakes. In addition, they consist of accidents causing damages to property, loss of income and work-related injuries or death. Hazard risks also include losses, injuries or deaths resulting from theft and other crimes.  
•	The distinctive feature of hazard risks is that they are undesirable because they can only result in a negative outcome. Hazard risks are generally insurable,  especially when they are common to many organizations. In such cases, insurers have the ability to estimate hazard risk probabilities and costs based on reliable historical data developed from a large pool of customers. 
 
13.	Is transferring as much uncertainty as possible generally a good risk financing approach?   (p.218) Transferring as much uncertainty as possible is often not the most cost-effective thing to do. Organizations can minimize their cost of risk by retaining a portion of risk. For example, they can reduce their cost of insurance by accepting a higher deductible [and/or a lower insurance limit], in which case they retain a greater portion of risk. Finding the right balance of risk retention and transfer is particularly important with risk financing alternatives because of the direct and indirect costs associated with assuming or transferring uncertainties. 
 
14.	Explain the difference between funded and unfunded retention.   (p.218) 
Funded retention implies that identifiable funds are set aside or available through financing arrangements for absorbing the financial loss that may occur as a result of a risk. By contrast, unfunded retention occurs when no specific funds or financing arrangements are allocated to cover for a financial loss, in which case the loss is absorbed through regular operating funds. Funded retention is always planned because it involves setting funds aside or establishing financing arrangements that can be used in the event of risks.  
 
15.	In what instances is self-insurance beneficial?   (p.220) 
•	To ensure that self-insurance is beneficial, organizations need a systematic approach to accumulate hazard risk information, forecast their losses, record actual losses, and compare their total cost of risk with what it would have been if they had insurance. 
•	Self-insurance generally benefits organizations that are committed to managing hazard risks proactively. It is typically used by very large organizations and government entities that can pool their hazard risk exposures using the same approach as insurance companies.  
 
16.	What is the main advantage of contingent capital arrangements?   (p.221) 
The main advantage of contingent capital arrangements is that organizations have the ability to negotiate better financing terms while they are in a position of strength,  namely before a catastrophic event or dramatic commodity price increase takes place.  
 
17.	Briefly explain the following terms applicable to insurance policies.   (p.222) 
a)	Insurance premium 
b)	Insurance policy 
c)	Insurance coverage 
d)	Deductible 
e)	Loss limit 
f)	Policy exclusion  
a)	Insurance premium - fee paid by the insured to purchase the insurance. 
b)	Insurance policy - contract issued by an insurer to provide insurance coverage. 
c)	Insurance coverage - nature and scope of the insurance policy. 
d)	Deductible - amount of loss that an insured client retains in the event of an insured loss.  
e)	Loss limit - maximum amount that an insurer agrees to pay for each unrelated claim.  
f)	Policy exclusion - types of losses specifically excluded from the coverage of an insurance policy. 
 
18.	Explain the conditions that make risks insurable (principle of risk insurability).   (p.223) Risks are considered insurable if their likelihood can be estimated with reasonable accuracy, if the losses can be measured in dollar amounts, if they happen randomly from acts of nature or accidents, if they have a definite time and place of occurrence, and if they can be spread over a large number of clients dispersed across geographic areas. Hazard risks that take place over a long period of time such as corrosion and decay caused by inadequate insulation are generally not insurable. However, damages from a flood caused by a bursting pipe have a definite time and place of occurrence and are therefore normally insurable. 
 
19.	Explain how a derivative works using the example of a manufacturer and customer of steel. (p.228) A manufacturer of steel may agree to sell its product to a customer at a later date based on the price of steel today. In doing so, the manufacturer mitigates the risk that the market price for steel may drop in the future. By contrast, the customer mitigates the risk that the market price may increase. Both parties are willing to make a deal based on the current price of steel. If the price increases, the manufacturer will receive less than the market price at the time of delivery. Alternatively, the customer will benefit from having a contract that provides steel at a lower price than the market price. The difference between the contract price and market price, times the amount of steel applicable to the contract, reflects the value of the derivative. The value is normally positive for one party and equally negative for the other. The value fluctuates over the duration of the contract based on the variations in market price of steel. 
 
 
20.	Explain how a forward can be used to mitigate currency exchange.   (p.230) 
In the case of currency forwards, the purpose of the derivative is to mitigate the risk of currency exchange. For example, a buyer and seller may agree to exchange Canadian dollars for U.S. dollars at a fixed rate in the future. The buyer might be an organization that will need Canadian dollars at a later time and wants to pay for them using U.S. dollars. Conversely, the seller might be an organization that will generate Canadian dollars and wants to obtain U.S. dollars for them. By agreeing to a forward contract, both parties can hedge their Canadian dollar transaction at a rate that is decided today, for a currency exchange that will take place at a later time. 
 
21.	Explain how a forward can be used to mitigate variations in interest rates.   (p.230-231) The purpose an interest rate forward is to mitigate the effects of variations in interest rates. The underlying asset is normally a federal government bond that fluctuates in market value in the opposite direction from interest rate fluctuations (because the interest rate of the bond is fixed). Accordingly, when interest rates decrease, the value of the forward or future increases and viceversa. The buyer of an interest rate forward or future may be an organization that generates interest revenue at a variable rate. If the interest rate decreases, the value of the derivative will increase and the buyer will make a profit that offsets its lower interest revenues. Alternatively, the seller of an interest rate forward or futures may be a borrower that incurs interest expenses at a variable rate. If the interest rate increases, the value of the forward or futures will decrease by the same amount that the underlying asset decreases. In this case, the seller will make a profit because the buyer is responsible for paying an amount greater than the market value of the bond deliverable by the seller. This profit will offset the higher interest expenses of the seller. In this example, both the buyer and seller mitigate the effects that interest rate variations can have on their profitability. 
 
22.	Explain how an interest rate swap works.   (p.233) 
Interest rate swaps are based on a notional amount of principal that has one organization paying interest to another according to a fixed rate, while the other pays interest at the same initial rate, with the exception that this initial rate is a variable rate. The variable rate is set to fluctuate in agreement with an official market rate such as a key interest rate set by a central bank. At the time of the swap agreement, the interest calculations are normally equivalent. However, if variable interest rates fluctuate, the swap has a positive value for one organization and a negative value for the other. Only the difference in the interest calculations is typically exchanged during the term of the contract. As such, the notional amount of principal is only used to calculate the interest due by each party over time, based on the fixed rate and the variable rates applicable. The notional amount always remains the same for the fixed and variable interest rate calculations. Moreover, the notional amount is not payable to anyone as part of the agreement. 
 
23.	Explain why hedging decisions related to credit risks and hazard risks are easier to make than hedging decisions related to market risks.   (p.235-236) 
•	Credit and hazard risks - Hedging decisions related to credit risks and hazard risks are generally easier to make, because they apply to risks that are undesirable, namely that only have a possibility of loss if they materialize. In such cases, the possibility of foregoing a gain is not applicable, and the decisions mostly boil down to whether a risk exposure is acceptable or not, whether it can be transferred effectively, and the costs of doing so.  
•	Market risks - Hedging decisions for market risks are more complex because they involve foregoing the possibility of a gain or greater return, in order to mitigate a potential loss or lower return. Accordingly, the hedging of market risks may not necessarily result in a better outcome.  
 
24.	When is the hedging of market risks desirable for an organization?   (p.236) 
Hedging market risks provides a greater certainty of outcome, which is sought by many organizations that want to mitigate risks. When a more certain outcome is desirable, hedging is a good strategy if the costs of hedging are acceptable. 
 
25.	Explain why size and uncertainty of exposures are important consideration for hedging? (p.236) There is a risk of over or under hedging when using derivatives. In such cases, hedging policy objectives will not be met and the overall outcome may be less favorable than if no hedging was done. Effective hedging relies on the ability to forecast financial risk exposures, because it is based on setting prices and terms now for an exchange that will take place in the future. The effectiveness of hedging depends on the accuracy of financial forecasts. 
 
26.	Explain why it is important to consider industry practices when hedging?   (p.237) 
Hedging that is not consistent with industry practices can put an organization at risk vis-à-vis its competitors. For example, some industries have the ability to transfer input cost increases to customers by increasing product prices, which is a form of natural hedging. Such industries also tend to lower prices if their costs decrease. An organization that hedges the possibility of input cost increases can find itself at a competitive disadvantage if these costs drop substantially. 
 
27.	Why is it important for organizations to have a hedging policy?   (p.236-237) 
In the absence of a clear policy [on hedging], there is limited assurance that hedging activities will be carried out systematically and consistently, in accordance with the expectations of board members and senior management. 
 
28.	How can an organization determine the benefit of its hedging practices?   (p.237) 
Organizations that adopt hedging policies and programs for mitigating financial risks should have a clear understanding of the benefits of their hedging practices, and the extent to which these benefits exceed the costs and trade-offs involved.  Most organizations achieve a clear understanding by forecasting and modeling the effects of their financial risk exposures, and the costs and trade-offs associated with different hedging strategies and derivative instruments. 
 
 
Multiple Choice Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1) Risk response is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Making and implementing decisions regarding the significance of risk. 
b)	Also known as risk treatment. 
c)	Responding to requests for risk and risk management information. 
d)	The manner in which risks respond to treatment. 
e)	The reactions of risk owners when confronted with unacceptable risks. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.202 
2) The purpose of risk response is to:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Implement a risk management framework and process for managing risks. 
b)	Alter levels of risk inconsistent with risk appetite, risk tolerance. 
c)	Alter levels of risk incompatible with optimal risk-reward. 
d)	Meet stakeholder requests for risk management information. 
e)	Ensure that risk owners are managing risks to acceptable levels. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	b) 
c) 	p.202 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
3) Risk avoidance is: 
a)	The partial or complete avoidance or abandonment of activities that create risks. 
b)	A risk control techniques that involves not assuming risks or assuming less risk. 
c)	A transfer of risks to third parties that are willing to assume them. 
d)	An absence of involvement or withdrawal from activities that create risks. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.202 
4) Identify two factors that cause organizations to avoid risks: 
a)	The risk-reward relationship of the risk is not favorable and cannot be transformed. 
b)	The uncertainties associated with the risk can be transferred cost-effectively. 
c)	The activities associated with the risk can be mitigated satisfactorily. 
d)	The risk presents a significant threat that cannot be turned into an opportunity. 
e)	The risk should not be assumed simply because it is avoidable. 
f)	There is no historical data indicating that the risk is manageable. 	a) 
d) 	p.203 
5) Risk retention is:  (select all that apply) 
a)	A planned, complete and funded involvement with risk activities. 
b)	The application of risk control and risk financing techniques for managing risks. 
c)	A risk control technique that involves assuming risk for achieving benefits. 
d)	A direct involvement with the activities and uncertainties associated with risk. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.202, 204 
6) Risk retention techniques include responses aimed at: 
a)	Managing activities and funding uncertainties. 
b)	Managing activities or transferring activities. 
c)	Funding uncertainties or transferring uncertainties. 
d)	Determining which risks cannot be avoided or transferred. 
e)	Assuming risks but transferring some activities or uncertainties. f) 	None of the above. 
g) All of the above. 	a) 	p.202, 204 
7) Risk transfer is:  (select all that apply) 
a)	A planned, complete and funded involvement with uncertainties. 
b)	The assignment of activities or uncertainties to an external party who is willing to accept the risks associated with the activities or uncertainties transferred. 
c)	The application of risk control and risk financing techniques for managing risks. 
d)	A risk financing technique that involves avoiding risks to prevent losses. e) None of the above. 
	f) 	All of the above. 	b) 	p.205 
8) Risk transfer techniques include responses aimed at: 
a)	Transferring activities and transferring uncertainties 
b)	Funding uncertainties or transferring uncertainties. 
c)	Managing activities or transferring activities 
d)	Determining which risks cannot be avoided or controlled. 
e)	Avoiding risks that should not be retained. 
f)	None of the above. 
g)	All of the above. 	a) 	p.202, 205 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
9) Conditions that should be met for risk retention include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	The risk can be owned naturally for a competitive advantage. 
b)	The risk is controllable, or can at least be monitored satisfactorily. 
c)	A cost-effective management or control framework can be implemented. d) None of the above. 
e) All of the above. 	e) 	p.206 
10) Conditions that should be met for risk transfer include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Favorable terms and conditions can be negotiated with an external party. 
b)	The external party is reliable and the transfer contract is enforceable. 
c)	The financial markets are efficient for the risk transfer solution. 
d)	There is an ability to monitor the external party and resolve disputes. e) None of the above. 
	f) 	All of the above. 	f) 	p.206 
11) Risk control is: 
a)	The management of activities involving risks, or the transfer of such activities to external parties who accept responsibility for the activities under a contract. 
b)	The direct involvement with activities and uncertainties associated with risk. 
c)	The process of making decisions regarding the significance of risks. 
d)	The risks associated with management controls and internal controls. 
e)	The control exercised over risks using management controls and internal controls. f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.209 
12) Risk control techniques include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Incorporation, contracting, outsourcing, franchising, leasing, joint ventures. 
b)	Monitoring, reducing likelihood or impact, changing context, exploiting risks. 
c)	Funding uncertainties internally or transferring uncertainties to contractors. 
d)	Supervision, authorization, approval, validation, reconciliation, verification. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.202 
p.209 
p.259 
13) Risk transfer techniques include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Incorporation, contracting, outsourcing, franchising, leasing, joint ventures. 
b)	Monitoring, reducing likelihood or impact, changing context, exploiting risks. 
c)	Insurance, surety agreements and derivative instruments. 
d)	Cash, revolving loans, reserves, program funds, natural hedging, self-insurance. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.202 
p.216 
14) Monitoring is: 
a)	A management control technique applied to investigate control deficiencies. 
b)	A method for ensuring that risk management actions are carried out as intended. 
c)	A risk control technique that detects situations, events or conditions in order to take corrective action before issues or problems arise. 
d)	The supervision of employees to ensure that work gets done  on a timely basis. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.209 
p.259 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
15) Risk acceptance is: 
a)	The type and amount of risk that an organization wants to pursue or assume. 
b)	The level of risk that an organization is willing and prepared to accept. 
c)	The direct involvement with the activities and uncertainties associated with risk. 
d)	Not taking action or not taking further action for managing risks. 
e)	Accepting risks that are consistent with the mission and vision of the organization. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.210 
16) Risk control techniques for reducing the impact of risk include: 
a)	Avoidance, retention, transfer, prevention, deterrence 
b)	Duplication, diversification, separation, suppression, containment 
c)	Supervision, authorization, approval, validation, reconciliation, verification. 
d)	Change strategies, change risk appetite or tolerance, change business model e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.210-211 
17) Risk control techniques for reducing the likelihood of risk include: 
a)	Preparation, prevention, detection, protection, deterrence 
b)	Duplication, diversification, separation, suppression, containment 
c)	Supervision, authorization, approval, validation, reconciliation, verification. 
d)	Change strategies, change risk appetite or tolerance, change business model e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.210-211 
18) Changing context as a risk control technique:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Involves substantially altering the risk profile of an organization. 
b)	Overlaps with other risk responses. 
c)	Typically involves decisions that are of a strategic nature. 
d)	Involves adopting changes that are highly transformative. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.212 
19) Exploiting risk as a risk control techniques:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Is taking advantage of desirable risks that present opportunities for reward. 
b)	Is the flipside of risk avoidance and the active side of risk acceptance. 
c)	Does not apply unless risk appetite and risk tolerance are defined. 
d)	Does not involve deferring risks until favorable conditions are met. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.213-214 
20) Transferring activities is: 
a)	A risk avoidance technique. 
b)	A risk control technique. 
c)	A risk financing technique. 
d)	A risk control and a risk financing technique. 
e)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.202 
21) Transferring uncertainties is: 
a)	A risk avoidance technique. 
b)	A risk control technique. 
c)	A risk financing technique. 
d)	A risk control and a risk financing technique. 
e)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.202 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
22) Funding uncertainties is: 
a)	A risk avoidance technique. 
b)	A risk control technique. 
c)	A risk financing technique. 
d)	A risk control and a risk financing technique. 
e)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.202 
23) Managing activities is: 
a)	A risk avoidance technique. 
b)	A risk control technique. 
c)	A risk financing technique. 
d)	A risk control and a risk financing technique. 
e)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.202 
24) Risk financing is: 
a)	The funding of uncertainties, or the transfer of uncertainties to external parties  who accept responsibility for the funding of uncertainties based on a contract. 
b)	The transfer of activities or uncertainties based on the use of contracts. 
c)	Funds obtained or borrowed for managing risks that may result in losses. 
d)	Money set aside or borrowed to fund risk opportunities and threats. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.217 
25) Risk financing techniques include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Cash accumulation, revolving loans, capital or program reserves. 
b)	Natural hedging, self-insurance, contingent capital arrangements. 
c)	Insurance, surety agreements, derivative instruments. 
d)	All of the above. 
e)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.202 
p.217 
26) When there is funded retention:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Financial losses are covered through regular operating funds. 
b)	Identifiable funds are set aside or available through financing arrangements. 
c)	Risks are funded using insurance and derivative instruments. 
d)	Risks are transferred to a third party who is willing to accept the risk for a fee. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.219-220 
27) Funded retention techniques include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Cash, working capital, revolving loans, capital reserves. 
b)	Natural hedging, self-insurance, contingent capital arrangements. 
c)	Insurance, surety agreements, derivative instruments. 
d)	All of the above. 
e)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.218-219 
28) Natural hedging refers to: 
a)	Instances where the financial effects of risk are offset as part of regular operations. 
b)	A planned and formal approach to retain hazard risks that can be self-insured. 
c)	The purchase of derivatives that offset one another to avoid the possibility of losses. 
d)	Insurance policies purchased for protection against acts of nature. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.220 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
29) Self-insurance is: 
a)	An unplanned or informal approach to retain and fund hazard risk exposures. 
b)	A planned, formal approach to retain, manage and fund hazard risk exposures. 
c)	An insurer who provides insurance for itself as well as for its customers. 
d)	An insurance plan that has a large deductible or high loss limit. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.220 
30) A contingent capital arrangement is: 
a)	An agreement that is contingent upon the willingness of an insurer to fund losses. 
b)	The conversion of debt into shares if a specified risk materializes. 
c)	A contract where an organization accepts to compensate another organization in the event that a third party fails to meet an obligation or performance requirement. 
d)	An agreement that provides debt or equity funding if a specified risk materializes. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.221 
31) A contingent capital arrangement: 
a)	Is a funding of uncertainty because the financial effects are not transferred. 
b)	Is a transfer of uncertainty because another organization provides the funding. 
c)	Is a risk transfer that is similar to insurance because there is a deductible. 
d)	Is a risk transfer that compensates an organization if a third party defaults. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.221 
32) Insurance is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	A planned and formal approach to retain, manage and fund hazard risk exposures. 
b)	A contractual agreement whereby an insured client pays a fee to an insurer, in return for compensation in the event of specified losses. 
c)	An agreement that provides debt or equity funding if a specified risk materializes. 
d)	A security issued for coverage in case specific hazard risk events take place. 
e)	A funded retention technique that relies on a contractual agreement with an insurer. f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.221 
33) The principles for making insurance available to clients are: 
a)	Insurance premium, insurance coverage, deductible, loss limit, policy exclusions. 
b)	Insurability of risks, client exposures, rule of law, acceptable terms and conditions. 
c)	Property insurance, casualty insurance, liability insurance, health insurance. 
d)	Insurability of risks, interest of clients, rule of indemnity, law of large numbers. 
e)	Guaranteed cost insurance, large deductible plans, retrospective rating plans. 
f)	Excess and umbrella liability insurance, reinsurance, insurance linked-securities. g) None of the above. 	d) 	p.225 
34) Guaranteed cost insurance is: 
a)	An insurance plan where the coverage, deductibles and loss limits are guaranteed but cannot be adjusted or modified during the policy period. 
b)	A type of insurance used for legal liabilities and income losses related to property. 
c)	An arrangement that makes financing available in the event of specified losses. 
d)	An insurance plan that does not adjust insurance premiums during a policy period, regardless of the claims made during that period. 
e)	An insurance plans that provides guarantees for indemnification in case of losses. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.225 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
35) An insurance-linked security is: 
a)	An insurance derivative that acquires its value based on insurable events or losses. 
b)	An arrangement that provides debt or equity funding if specified risks materialize. 
c)	A security that provides superior returns unless specified hazard risk events take place, in which case the returns can be substantially reduced. 
d)	A contract where an insurer accepts to provide security for a fee, in order to compensate an organization if a third party does not meet an obligation. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.226 
36) A surety agreement is: 
a)	A contract where an organization accepts (for a fee) to compensate another in the event that a third party fails to meet an obligation or performance requirement. 
b)	An arrangement that provides debt or equity funding if specified risks materialize. 
c)	A security that provides superior returns unless specified hazard risk events take place, in which case the returns can be substantially reduced. 
d)	An insurance derivative that acquires its value based on insurable events or losses. 
e)	An agreement that indemnifies against crimes perpetrated by employees. f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.226 
37) A derivative is: 
a)	An investment that is purchased to provide an option to buy or sell a stock. 
b)	A contract that derives its value from an underlying asset or condition. 
c)	A security that provides superior returns unless specified risks take place. 
d)	A contract for hedging financial risks associated with interest rates and dividends. 
e)	A guarantee provided by an organization for the performance of an obligation. f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.228 
38) A forward is:  (select all that apply) 
a)	A standardized futures contract that is traded on an exchange. 
b)	A contract that gives the holder (buyer) a right to buy or a right to sell in the future. 
c)	A contract to exchange cash flows for a period of time, based on terms agreed now. 
d)	A contract to buy or sell an asset at a later time, for a price agreed at the present time. 
e)	A contract that offers a strike price in return for a premium price. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.229 
39) A call option is:  (select all that apply) 
a)	A contract to buy or sell an asset at a later time, for a price agreed at the present time. 
b)	A contract that gives the holder (buyer) a right to buy an asset during a period of time, for a price that is agreed at the present time. 
c)	A contract that gives the holder (buyer) a right to sell an asset during a period of time, for a price that is agreed at the present time. 
d)	A contract to exchange cash flows for a period of time, based on terms agreed now. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.231 
40) A swap is:  
a)	A contract to buy or sell an asset at a later time, for a price agreed at the present time. 
b)	A contract to exchange cash flows during a period of time, in accordance with terms and conditions that are agreed at the present time. 
c)	A contract that gives the holder (buyer) a right to sell (swap) an asset during a period of time, for a price that is agreed at the present time. 
d)	A contract that gives the holder (buyer) a right to buy or a right to sell in the future. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.233 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
41) Hedging is: 
a)	A risk management approach for mitigating credit risks and hazard risks. 
b)	The analysis of derivative instruments to mitigate financial risks. 
c)	The offset of the financial risks as part of regular operations. 
d)	A contract to buy or sell an asset at a later time, for a price agreed at the present time. 
e)	A risk management technique that offsets the financial effects or risk. f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.235 
42) The following aspects should be considered when making hedging decisions: a) Natural ownership of risks. 
b)	Benefits of maintaining predictable cash flows. 
c)	Size and certainty of risk exposures. 
d)	Suitability of derivative instruments. 
e)	Industry practices. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	f) 	p.236-237 
 
 
True or False Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Risk response is making and implementing decisions regarding the significance of risk. 	True 	p.202 
2. Risk response is the manner in which risks respond to treatment. 	False 	p.202 
3. The purpose of risk response is to alter levels of risk inconsistent with risk appetite and risk tolerance, and incompatible with optimal risk-reward. 	True 	p.202 
4. The purpose of risk response is to implement a risk management framework and process for managing risks that meets organizational requirements. 	False 	p.202 
5. Risk response includes decisions for assuming greater levels of risk.  	True 	p.202 
6. Risk response includes solutions for modifying the likelihood and impact of risks. 	True 	p.202 
7. A risk response may apply to an individual risks or to multiple risks at once. 	True 	p.202 
8. Risk control and risk financing are mutually exclusive techniques. 	False 	p.202 
9. Risk avoidance, risk retention and risk transfer reflect the involvement with risk. 	True 	p.202 
10. Risk transfer excludes risk control techniques. 	False 	p.202 
11. Risk financing excludes risk retention techniques. 	False 	p.202 
12. Risk avoidance is not necessarily an informed decision. 	False 	p.202 
13. Risk avoidance can be proactive or reactive. 	True 	p.202 
14. Risk avoidance decisions are always obvious to make. 	False 	p.203 
15. Risk avoidance can be partial or complete. 	False 	p.202 
16. Organizations often decide to avoid risks that they have previously assumed. 	True 	p.230 
17. Risks that are avoidable should not be assumed. 	False 	p.202-203 
18. Risk retention is the direct involvement with activities and uncertainties associated with risk. However, risk retention can be complete or partial. 	True 	p.204 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
19. Risk retention is a direct or indirect involvement with activities associated with risk.  	False 	p.204 
20. Risk retention is a risk control technique. 	False 	p.202 
21. Risk retention is always planned, never assumed inadvertently or informally. 	False 	p.205 
22. Risk retention can be planned or unplanned, complete or partial, funded or unfunded. 	True 	p.205 
23. Risk transfer is the assignment of activities or uncertainties to an external party who  is willing to accept the risks associated with the activities or uncertainties transferred. 	True 	p.205 
24. Risk transfer implies transferring activities or uncertainties using contracts.  	True 	p.205 
25. Risk transfer is complete whenever activities or uncertainties are fully transferred to another party who is willing to accept the risks associated with the transfer. 	False 	p.205 
26. Risk transfer has the same effect as risk avoidance. 	False 	p.205 
27. Risk transfer is always complete given that risks are transferred to another party. 	False 	p.205 
28. Responding to risk is typically an iterative process. 	True 	p.205 
29. Predictability of outcomes is a factor to consider when selecting risk responses. 	True 	p.205 
30. It is not beneficial to manage a risk to a lower level unless the risk is significant. 	False 	p.206 
31. Risk response decisions should not be made strictly on the basis of risk significance,  or where a risk appears on a risk map. 	True 	p.206 
32. The most effective risk management techniques mitigate the effects of risk. 	False 	p.207 
33. The most effective risk management techniques target the causes of risk. 	True 	p.207 
34. Risk maps help determine how to respond to risks. 	True 	p.207 
35. Risk maps are not insightful for determining how to respond to risks. 	False 	p.209 
36. Using a combination of risk management techniques creates a safety margin. 	True 	p.208 
37. Risk control does not include transferring activities to external parties using contracts. 	False 	p.202, 209 
38. Risk control includes transferring activities to external parties using contracts. 	True 	p.202, 209 
39. Monitoring is an internal control technique applied to investigate control deficiencies. 	False 	p.209 
40. A risk control technique that detects situations, events or conditions in order to take corrective action before issues or problems arise. 	True 	p.209 
41. Risk acceptance is not taking action or not taking further action for managing risks. 	True 	p.201 
42. Risk acceptance is the level of risk that an organization is willing and prepared to accept. 	False 	p.201, 80 
43. Reducing the impact of risk is the main priority when retained risks are controllable. 	False 	p.211 
44. Reducing the likelihood of risk is the main priority when retained risks are controllable. 	True 	p.211 
45. Reducing the likelihood of risk is the only option when retained risks are not controllable. 	False 	p.211 
46. Reducing the impact of risk is the only option when retained risks are not controllable. 	True 	p.211 
47. Changing context is a risk control technique that involves substantially altering the risk profile of an organization. Its distinctive feature is the scale of the transformation. 	True 	p.212 
48. Changing context is a risk transfer technique that involves substantially altering the risk profile of an organization. Its distinctive feature is the extent of the risk transfer. 	False 	p.212 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
49. Exploiting risk involves risk control technique that take advantage of desirable risks. 	True 	p.213 
50. Exploiting risk as a risk control technique applies only if risk appetite is defined. 	False 	p.214 
51. Deferring opportunities is part of risk control techniques for exploiting risks 	True 	p.214 
52. Transferring activities is a risk avoidance technique. 	False 	p.202 
53. Transferring activities is a risk financing technique. 	False 	p.202 
54. Transferring uncertainties is a risk avoidance technique. 	False 	p.202 
55. Transferring uncertainties is a risk control technique. 	False 	p.202 
56. Funding uncertainties is a risk control technique. 	False 	p.202 
57. Funding uncertainties is a risk transfer technique. 	True 	p.202 
58. Managing activities is a risk control and a risk financing technique. 	False 	p.202 
59. Risk control techniques include managing activities and funding uncertainties. 	True 	p.202 
60. Risk transfer techniques include transferring activities and transferring uncertainties. 	True 	p.202 
61. Risk financing is the transfer of activities or uncertainties based on the use of contracts. 	False 	p.202, 217 
62. Risk financing is the funding of uncertainties, or the transfer of uncertainties to external parties who accept responsibility for the funding of uncertainties based on a contract. 	True 	p.202 
63. Risk financing techniques include funding uncertainties and transferring uncertainties. 	True 	p.202 
64. Risk financing techniques include natural hedging, self-insurance, and revolving loans. 	True 	p.202, 217 
65. Risk financing techniques include contracts for transferring activities or uncertainties. 	False 	p.202 
66. Every organization uses risk financing techniques. 	True 	p.217 
67. The transfer of uncertainties is mostly limited to hazard risks and financial risks. 	True 	p.217 
68. The retention of uncertainties applies to every type of risk that is assumed. 	True 	p.217 
69. Hazard risks are those associated with acts of nature such as storms and earthquakes. 	False 	p.218 
70. Hazard risks are risk related to acts of nature, accidents and crime. 	True 	p.218 
71. Hazard risks are undesirable because they can only result in a negative outcome. 	True 	p.218 
72. Transferring as much uncertainty as possible is usually a cost-effective approach. 	False 	p.218 
73. Transferring as much uncertainty as possible is often not a cost-effective approach. 	True 	p.218 
74. Funded retention implies that identifiable funds are set aside or available through financing arrangements for absorbing a financial loss resulting from a risk. 	True 	p.218 
75. Funded retention may be planned or unplanned. 	False 	p.218 
76. Funded retention techniques include insurance, surety agreements and derivatives. 	False 	p.218 
77. Funded retention techniques include natural hedging and self-insurance. 	True 	p.219 
78. Natural hedging refers to instances where the financial effects of risk are offset as part of regular operations. 	True 	p.220 
79. Natural hedging refers to a planned and formal approach to retain hazard risks that can be self-insured. 	False 	p.220 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
80. Self-insurance is a planned and formal approach to retain, manage and fund hazard risk exposures. 	True 	p.220 
81. Self-insurance is an informal approach to retain and fund hazard risk exposures. 	False 	p.220 
82. A contingent capital arrangement makes funds available if a specified risk materializes. 	True 	p.221` 
83. A contingent capital arrangement is a contract that provides compensation in the event that a third party fails to meet an obligation or performance requirement. 	False 	p.221 
84. A contingent capital arrangement is a transfer of uncertainty because another organization is responsible for making funds available in the event that a risk materializes. 	False 	p.221 
85. A contingent capital arrangement is a risk retention technique that funds uncertainties. 	True 	p.221, 202 
86. An insurance premium is the amount of loss retained in the event of an insured loss. 	False 	p.222 
87. An insurance deductible is the limit that an insurer agrees to pay for unrelated claims. 	False 	p.222 
88. A loss limit is the maximum amount that can be lost per unrelated insurance claims. 	False 	p.222 
89. Guaranteed cost insurance is an insurance plan where insurance coverage, deductibles and loss limits cannot be adjusted or modified during the policy period. 	False 	p.225 
90. Guaranteed cost insurance is an insurance plan that does not adjust insurance premiums during a policy period, regardless of the claims made during that period. 	True 	p.225 
91. Reinsurance is an increase of insurance coverage or loss limit using another insurer. 	False 	p.225 
92. Reinsurance is used by insurers to limit or diversify their potential losses. 	True 	p.226 
93. An insurance-linked security is a derivative instrument that acquires its value based on insurable events or losses that occur during a specified period. 	False 	p.226 
94. An insurance-linked security is a security that provides superior investment returns unless specified hazard risk events take place, in which case the returns can be substantially reduced and portions of the investment principal may not be reimbursed. 	True 	p.226 
95. A surety agreement is a contract where an organization accepts (for a fee) to compensate another in the event that a third party fails to meet an obligation. 	True 	p.226 
96. A surety agreement is a derivative contract that makes funding available if specified risks materialize, in which case the value of the derivative increases. 	False 	p.226 
97. A derivative is a contract that derives its value from an underlying asset or condition. 	True 	p.228 
98. A derivative is an investment purchased to provide an option to buy or sell a stock. 	False 	p.228 
99. Derivatives can be used for mitigating risks, as well as for assuming risks. 	True 	p.228 
100. Derivatives are usually closed out or settled in cash without any transfer of goods. 	True 	p.229 
101. Closing out a derivative means buying or selling a derivative that has the opposite side of the one already held, in which case both contracts can be netted with each other. 	True 	p.229 
102. Closing out a derivative means settling a derivative in cash before its expiry date. 	False 	p.229 
103. Settling a derivative in cash means that the party with the positive derivative value receives payment for that value from the other party that has the negative value. 	True 	p.229 
104. Settling a derivative in cash means that the party with the negative derivative value receives payment for that value from the other party that has the positive value. 	False 	p.229 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
105. A forward is a standardized futures contract that is traded on an exchange. 	False 	p.229 
106. A futures is a standardized forward contract that is traded on an exchange. 	True 	p.229 
107. A forward is a contract to buy or sell an asset at a later time, for a price agreed at the present time. A forward can also derive its value from an underlying condition. 	True 	p.229-230 
108. Basis risk means that a hedging solution is not perfectly calibrated or matched to organizational needs. 	True 	p.230 
109. Basis risk is the risk that a counterparty to a derivative may not honor its obligations. 	False 	p.230 
110. Forwards and futures can be used to mitigate the risks of currency exchange, interest rate variations, and weather conditions. 	True 	p.230 
111. A call option is a contract that gives the buyer (holder) a right to buy an asset during a period of time, at a price that is agreed at the present time. 	True 	p.232 
112. A call option is a contract that gives the buyer (holder) a right to buy or sell an asset during a period of time, at a price that is agreed at the present time. 	False 	p.232 
113. Options are often used as part of hedging strategies that includes other derivatives. 	True 	p.232 
114. Swaps are contracts to exchange cash flows during a period of time, in accordance with terms that are agreed at the present time. The contract defines the dates when the cash flows are exchanged and how the amounts are calculated.  	True 	p.233 
115. Swaps are contracts to exchange assets at a specified future time, in accordance with terms that are agreed at the present time. The contract defines the date when the assets are exchanged and how the value of the assets are calculated.  	False 	p.233 
116. Hedging is a risk management technique that offsets the financial effects of risks 	True 	p.235 
117. Hedging is the offset of the financial risks as part of regular operations. 	False 	p.235, 220 
118. Considering industry practices is important when making hedging decisions. 	True 	p.237 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 6  
Risk Management Integration 
 
 
Review Questions 
 
1. The concept of integration 
 
a)	Briefly explain the concept of integration.   (p.250) 
Integration is the combination of different elements or parts into a unified whole designed to achieve an overall purpose. With any kind of integration, it is always understood that every part has a distinct role to play, and that the performance of the whole is dependent upon the performance of each individual part. However, the performance of the whole is also dependent on the ability of the parts to work well together. If the parts are dysfunctional with each other, the whole cannot achieve its purpose satisfactorily, even if each individual part performs well on its own. Alternatively, if the parts work well on their own and with each other, the whole will achieve its purpose. Only when both conditions are met, can the whole become greater than the sum of its individual parts. (Students may give examples such as an orchestra, automobile or team sport). 
 
b)	Provide a conceptual example that illustrates the importance of integration.   (p.250) 
•	Orchestra - All musicians and instrumental groups have to play well and in harmony. Musicians follow their notebooks and the directions of the conductor who sets the tone and rhythm using gestures that everyone can see. If there is dissonance in the combination of sounds, the orchestra will fail to impress and concertgoers will leave. 
•	Automobile - An automobile cannot operate well unless all of its systems are functional and interconnected. The main systems of an automobile include the ignition, the engine, the transmission, the steering and the brakes. Other critical systems include gauges, lights, signals and ventilation. All systems have to work well together for safe and effective operation. 
•	Team sports - Every player has a position and role to play. Players have to be good at playing their position, but they also need to be good at playing together effectively as a team. They must follow the directions of the coach, and buy-in to the overall strategy of the team. 
 
2. Risk management integration – Framework integration mechanisms 
 
a)	Explain how to make risk management integration happen by design.   (p.252) 
•	Risk management integration can only happen by design. To achieve integration, organizations must make it a priority and plan their approach carefully. An important first step is to make the ERM leader and function responsible for risk management integration. Their performance objectives should include achieving integration in accordance with plans and desirable outcomes developed based on a recognized capability model. Risk management integration will not happen unless someone is responsible and accountable for it. The support and collaboration of senior executives, risk owners and process owners are also essential. 
•	If risk management is not integrated, it is because the foundation, structure and process arrangements needed to support integration are either not in place, insufficient or not functioning properly. In some cases, it is possible to revisit the arrangements already in place and make enhancements to them. The risk management framework can support or supplement these arrangements with integration mechanisms that fit organizational needs. Risk management professionals can design risk management frameworks that take into account the arrangements already in place and build upon them. 
b)	Explain culture assessment as a foundation mechanism for integration.   (p.252) 
•	Assess organizational risk culture and determine if it is supportive of sharing risk information and raising issues about risk management practices. 
•	Determine if there are differences of risk attitude between management functions and business units, and whether these differences are desirable. 
•	Develop a plan for transforming risk culture to better support integration. 
 
c)	Explain ERM leadership as a structure mechanism for integration.   (p.253) 
•	Designate a chief risk officer or ERM leader, and make this person responsible and accountable for achieving risk management integration. 
•	Ensure that the chief risk officer or ERM leader is focused on their roles  
•	of educator, advisor, coordinator and overseer of risk management. 
 
d)	Explain risk assessment as a process mechanism for integration.   (p.254) 
•	Develop risk profiles that include portfolio views related to key objectives. Identify concentrations of risks and risks that can affect multiple objectives. 
•	Conduct risk assessment workshops with representatives from various management functions and business units in the same workshop.  
•	Specifically discuss and assess the relationships and interdependencies between risks using 
criteria such as propensity and susceptibility. 
 
3. Three Lines of Defense model 
 
a)	Illustrate the Three Lines of Defense model using a diagram.   (p.255) 
 
 
b)	Explain why external auditors and regulators may be considered lines of defense.   (p.257-258) 
•	External auditors - External auditors can be considered a fourth line of defense because they provide assurance.  However, external auditing is typically limited to the attestation of financial statements and internal controls over financial reporting. (…) External auditors can be mandated to assess specific management or assurance functions of the organization, including the internal audit function. External auditors provide independent assurance when they are accountable to board members who are not part of senior management, such as those forming an audit committee that excludes senior managers. 
•	Regulators - Regulators may be considered an added line of defense, if their work contributes to organizational risk management and control objectives. Many industries are subject to regulatory audits, reviews or inspections (…). In most cases, the work conducted by regulators contributes to the risk management and control objectives of organizations. 
Accordingly, regulators provide a form of assurance that is valuable to senior management and board members. However, the work of regulators typically focusses on issues of compliance relating to matters of government policy and public interest (…). It is important to remember that the assurance obtained from regulators is never a substitute for the three lines of defense. Regulators have their own agenda and do not represent the organization. 
 
4. Internal control systems 
 
a)	What is an internal control system?   (p.258) 
An internal control system can be defined as the arrangements and activities that provide assurance that operations are carried out as intended to achieve organizational objectives.  
 
b)	What is the purpose of an internal control system?   (p.258) 
The purpose of an internal control system is to provide assurance that specific expectations are met. These expectations are known as control objectives. They include effective and efficient operations, the safeguarding of assets, compliance with policies, laws and regulations, and reliable, relevant and timely reporting. 
 
c)	What are the differences between risk management actions, risk responses and internal control activities? Provide an example that illustrates the differences.   (p.259) 
•	Risk management actions  - are the activities that organizations do for managing risks. Whenever these actions are insufficient, additional actions are implemented in response to risks. Accordingly, risk management actions include risk responses. 
•	Internal control activities - are the methods that help ensure that risk management actions and responses are carried out as intended,  appropriately and in a timely manner.   
•	Example - an organization monitors customer accounts (risk management action), and responds to credit risks by making changes to its credit policies and implementing them (risk response). The policy changes are authorized, and the monitoring is supervised (internal control activities). The authorization and supervision ensure that the policy changes are valid and that the monitoring is effective. 
 
5. Internal control systems – Internal control activities 
 
a)	What are the eight internal control activities?   (p.260-261) 
• 
• • 
• 	Supervision 
Authorization 
Approval 
Validation 	• 
• • 
• 	Reconciliation 
Verification 
Segregation of duties 
Restriction of access 
 
b)	Explain the segregation of duties control activity and provide an example.   (p.260) 
•	Segregation involves separating duties among different people to reduce the possibility of errors, fraud or misappropriations. For instance, the recording of transactions should be separated from the custody of assets, and reconciliations between records and assets should be done independently by someone else. 
•	Examples: Recording of inventory transactions by financial services. Custody of inventory by a separate group within production. Monthly inventory count and reconciliation done by someone not involved with the recording or custody. 
 
c)	What are the differences between preventive, detective and hybrid controls?   (p.261) 
•	Preventive controls - are applied in advance of processes, activities or transactions taking place. They help avoid unintended actions, events or results.  
•	Detective controls - identify unintended actions, events or results when they occur.   
•	Hybrid controls - When a control combines both elements of prevention and detection, it is known as a hybrid control. 
d)	Explain whether management supervision is a preventive or detective control.   (p.260-261) 
•	Supervision ensures that processes and activities are carried out as intended, that the organization remains focused on what it needs to do, and that it operates in a manner consistent with expectations. Example: Supervising production systems to ensure that quality products are manufactured on a timely basis in accordance with production schedules. 
•	Supervision is a hybrid control because it includes elements of prevention and detection. • Prevention - supervise employees to ensure that they are doing things properly 
•	Detection - detect problems early on as they occur). 
 
6. Internal control systems – Management control frameworks 
 
a)	What are management control frameworks?   (p.263) 
Management control frameworks, also known as management control systems, are the structures, processes, approaches and methods that influence managers and employees to achieve organizational objectives. 
 
b)	What are the four key components of management control frameworks?   (p.263-264) 
•	Responsibility centers 
•	Business process management 
•	Performance measurement • Performance-based rewards. 
 
c)	Explain how performance-based rewards are a control mechanism.   (p.265) 
Managers naturally place greater emphasis on activities and results that are rewarded as opposed to those that are not.  Management control frameworks therefore emphasize the need for performance incentives to motivate managers. (…) Because people are more strongly motivated by positive incentives than punishment or sanctions, management control should mostly be reward oriented.  The criteria for defining and rewarding managerial performance need to be consistent with organizational goals and objectives. Management control is strong when managers are motivated to achieve organizational goals and objectives at the entity-level, by making sure that their function or unit contributes to making the organization successful. 
 
7. Integration with strategy 
 
a)	Explain why the integration of risk management with strategy is important.   (p.265) The integration of risk management with strategy is perhaps the most important aspect for practicing integrated risk management. This aspect is a defining feature of ERM because strategies reflect what an organization is trying to achieve, which is the starting point for risk management. In addition, strategies and strategic risks apply at the entity level and have implications on all organizational functions and units. Choosing the right strategies, and implementing strategies effectively are critical for organizational success. Managing the risks associated with strategy selection and implementation is integral to ERM. (…) Among all things that board members and senior managers are responsible for, nothing can affect organizational success more fundamentally than strategy.  How well an organization performs is mostly attributable to the soundness of its strategies and the effectiveness of their implementation.  Organizations create or destroy value mostly as a result of strategic risks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b)	Outline how risk management integrates with strategy using a diagram.   (p.266) 
 
 
8. Integration with strategy – Strategic planning and risk management integration 
 
a)	Explain two risk management framework mechanisms and two risk management process mechanisms for integrating risk management with strategic planning.   (p.267-269) 
Framework mechanisms - key points: 
•	Leadership by the CEO - reinforce risk analysis, direct functions to work collaboratively 
•	Board oversight - review strategies and risks, challenge assumptions, monitor implementation 
•	Knowledge and skills - strategic planning and ERM understand each other’s processes and have the skills and abilities required for the integration of risk management with strategy 
•	Risk awareness and culture - sharing of risk info, open discussions, challenge of assumptions 
•	Risk capacity and capability - not exceed risk capacity, work within capabilities, transfer risks 
•	Risk appetite - not exceed risk appetite, statements of risk appetite for strategic opportunities 
•	ERM function - propose how to integrate risk management with strategy, provide training and assistance for applying risk management as part of strategy selection and execution. 
•	Risk ownership - implementation risks assigned to risk owners, monitoring of implementation 
•	Plan integration - strategic plan includes risk mgmt actions, actions cascade to functions/units 
Process mechanisms - key points: 
•	Scalability and modularity - scalable to strategic planning and individual strategies 
•	Objective- centric perspective - identify risks associated with strategies and related objectives 
•	Attention to bias - question strategies and challenge their underlying assumptions 
•	Context analysis - risks that influence strategy selection and execution. ERM and strategy professionals work in close collaboration, focus on emerging risks, and disruptive trends. 
•	Risk identification - top-down and bottom approach, strategy selection and implementation 
•	Risk analysis - scenario analysis, contrarian analysis, modeling and simulations 
•	Risk profiling - strategy risk profiles, acceptable risks (risk appetite and risk rewards), analyze the effects of strategies on the overall risk profile of the organization. 
•	Risk evaluation - strategies evaluated based on overall risk appetite, strategies revised if exceeding risk appetite or risks appetite revised if going forward with strategy. 
•	Risk response - Risk retention and transfer techniques considered, implementation of strategies can be managed in a manner similar to major risk responses. 
•	Monitoring and reporting - monitoring of risks that influence strategies, monitoring of implementation risks, process for reviewing strategies and making course corrections. 
 
 
 
 
b)	Indicate whether your examples apply to strategy selection and/or execution.   (p.267-269) 
Framework mechanisms 	Sel 	Exe 	Process mechanisms 	Sel 	Exe 
Leadership by the CEO 	 	 	Scalability and modularity 	 	 
Board oversight 	 	 	Objective- centric perspective 	 	 
Knowledge and skills 	 	 	Attention to bias 	 	 
Risk awareness and culture 	 	 	Context analysis 	 	 
Risk capacity and capability 	 	 	Risk identification 	 	 
Risk appetite 	 	 	Risk analysis 	 	 
ERM function 	 	 	Risk profiling 	 	 
Risk ownership 	 	 	Risk evaluation 	 	 
Plan integration 	 	 	Risk response 	 	 
 	 	 	Monitoring and reporting 	 	 
 
 	 
9. Integration with strategy – Environmental analysis integration 
 
a)	Explain risk sensing and how it contributes to environmental analysis.   (p.270) 
Risk sensing can be defined as a combination of advanced data analytics and human insights that help organizations identify, analyze and monitor risks. It is carried out by identifying and monitoring risk indicators of events, trends and anomalies in structured and unstructured data from sources external and internal to organizations. (…) With the help of risk indicators along with risk sensing methodologies and software, organizations have the ability to scan and actively monitor their external and internal environments extensively, in ways that are otherwise very difficult to carry out timely and cost-effectively. 
 
b)	Using a diagram, explain how SWOT analysis facilitates integration.   (p.272) 
SWOT analysis can be defined as a structured method for grouping and analyzing information accumulated from environmental analysis. It provides an overview of the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats that can affect organizational performance and results. A welldeveloped SWOT analysis provides the basis for developing strategies that leverage organizational strengths, overcome weaknesses, seize opportunities and defend against threats. 

STRENGTHS		WEAKNESSES
Identify strengths. Analyze how they are aligned with existing strategies and risks assumed. Develop strategies, pursue opportunities, and assume risks that are best suited to organizational strengths.		Identify weaknesses. Analyze how they affect existing strategies and create risks. Address the weaknesses taking into account the strategies developed, the opportunities pursued and the risks assumed.
OPPORTUNITIES		THREATS
Identify opportunities. Maintain a greater focus on emerging risks, and disruptive trends and technologies. Consider how the opportunities can be exploited through strategies and risk responses based on organizational strengths and weaknesses. 		Identify threats. Consider whether some threats can be turned into opportunities and how to exploit them. Determine how the threats can be mitigated through strategies and risk responses based on organizational strengths and weaknesses. 

 
 
 
10. Integration with strategy – Risk analysis integration 
 
a)	What is scenario analysis?   (p.273) 
Scenario analysis is a structured approach for developing descriptive views (scenarios) of how the future may unfold and result in various possible outcomes. It examines how external and internal forces may challenge business models, strategies and assumptions over a defined period that is usually three years or more.  
 
b)	Explain how scenario analysis is relevant in the context of strategy.   (p.273) 
In the context of strategy, scenario analysis can be used to examine how emerging risks, disruptive trends and disruptive technologies may affect strategies. Scenario analysis can also be applied for analyzing alternative strategies and determining how they may be responsive to uncertain events, trends or changes in condition. The scenarios can be grouped under categories such as best case, expected case and worst case, each with anticipated outcomes and estimates of probabilities.  If an organization realizes that the success of its strategies depends on a generally optimistic view, it may decide to revise its strategies, or otherwise determine how to respond to the risks associated with more realistic views. 
 
c)	What are modeling and simulation?   (p.274) 
•	Modeling - Modeling is the creation of a mathematical model that represents a system where variables are known, measurable and anticipated based on conditions and probability distributions. Models are developed using historical data, statistical analysis, and expert advice to help determine how independent variables behave and affect dependent variables. 
•	Simulation - A simulation is the exercise of looking at how a model (system) behaves under particular conditions and assumptions.  The behaviors are reflected through the independent variables and their probabilities, their effects on dependent variables, and the forecasts generated by the simulations. 
 
d)	Explain how modeling and simulation are relevant in the context of strategy.   (p.274) In the context of strategy, modeling and simulation should supplement scenario analysis to measure and forecast the financial effects of strategies and risks, and determine the range of possible outcomes.  To make modeling easier, organizations may initially focus on a limited number of key variables affecting strategies, and having the greatest impact on organizational performance and results. 
 
11. Integration with strategy – Strategy risk profiles 
 
a)	What is a strategy risk profile?   (p.275) 
A strategy risk profile is an overview of the risks applicable to a strategy. Like any other risk profile, it should include risk information for individual risks, the assessment of the risks, and one or more composite (aggregate) views of risk. 
 
b)	Explain the conceptual approach for developing a strategy risk profile.   (p.275) There is no specific approach for developing a strategy risk profile. It is simply a matter of adapting the risk management process to strategy, taking into account that strategies involve opportunities and threats. (…) Conceptually, the approach for developing a strategy risk profile is similar to developing a business case. The main difference is that the benefits anticipated are compared with the risk assumed, in addition to the investments and expenses incurred for implementing the strategy.  
 
 
 
 
c)	Illustrate the strategy risk profile formula with a diagram.   (p.277) 
 
 
d)	Illustrate the risk-reward analysis of strategies using a matrix.   (p.278) 
	Reward 	High Reward / Low Risk	High Reward / High Risk
Level
These strategies are the best alternatives. 	These strategies can be pursued if the risks They should be embraced and pursued 	involved do not exceed risk capacity and risk aggressively. They are often associated 	appetite. They are often associated with with risks that can be owned naturally and 	decisions that are transformative or disruptive, exploited to create a strategic advantage.	or that involve significant commitments.
	Low Reward / Low Risk	Low  Reward / High Risk
These strategies may be pursued if they 	These strategies are the worst alternatives are a good fit with existing operations and 	and should be avoided. They do not provide if they are easy to implement. They are 	adequate reward for the risks assumed. 
often associated with fine tuning the things 	They are often associated with highly competitive that an organization already does.	industries and markets with big entry barriers.
Risk Level
 
 
12. Integration with performance 
 
a)	What is performance management?   (p.278) 
Performance management can be defined as a process that sets expectations and targets, observes behaviors and actions, measures progress toward achieving targets, and takes corrective action where appropriate. 
 
b)	What is performance measurement?   (p.278) 
Performance measurement is the part of performance management that has to do with setting targets and measuring achievements. For example, setting a revenue target and measuring revenues against the target is performance measurement. Alternatively, setting expectations for a sales team, observing behaviors, measuring performance, and taking corrective action to ensure that the target is met consistently with expectations is performance management.  
 
 
 
 
13. Integration with performance – Balanced scorecard 
 
a)	What is the balanced scorecard?   (p.279) 
The balanced scorecard is a performance measurement framework. It proposes that organizational performance should be measured across four distinct perspectives: financial, customer, operational (internal business process), and learning and growth. 
 
b)	Explain the four perspectives of the scorecard and outline a core measure for each.   (p.280) 
•	Financial perspective - focus on value creation outcomes 
Core measures - revenue growth, cost structure, profitability, ROI, asset utilization 
•	Customer perspective - focus on customers 
Core measures - market share, customer satisfaction, account growth, account profitability 
•	Operational perspective - focus on internal processes 
Core measures - costs, timeliness, quality, service innovation, research and development • Learning and growth perspective - focus on employees and information 
Core measures - competencies, engagement, retention, productivity, information quality 
 
c)	Why is it important to maintain a balance across the four perspectives?   (p.280) Maintaining a balance of performance objectives and measures across the four perspectives ensures that organizations do not overly focus on activities that maximize financial (or value creation) performance strictly for the short term such as cutting costs indiscriminately. Increasing customer satisfaction, investing to improve processes, and training employees do not always provide immediate financial results. However, these activities are drivers of value creation and are essential for long term success. Keeping the right balance across the four perspectives helps ensure that performance is sustainable. 
 
14. Integration with performance – Performance indicators 
 
a)	What is a performance indicator?   (p.281) 
A performance indicator can be defined as a measurable value that demonstrates a result or outcome. The purpose of performance indicators is to measure and monitor levels  of performance in achieving objectives, and take corrective action where necessary.  
 
b)	Explain the difference between leading and lagging indicators.   (p.281) 
•	Leading indicators - reflect [are based on] drivers or enablers of performance such as those that can be included in a balanced scorecard for strategy implementation. 
•	Lagging indicators - measure a result or outcome that has already happened. 
 
15. Integration with performance – Risk indicators 
 
a)	What is a risk indicator?   (p.282) 
A risk indicator is a signal that reveals the presence of risk and measures the amount of risk.  The purpose is to measure and monitor risks, and determine how they are trending. 
 
b)	Why can risk and performance indicators be reflected in the same measure?   (p.282) Most drivers of performance are sources of risk. For example, employee training and machinery inspections may be considered inverse leading indicators of [product quality] risk as well as drivers of performance for product quality. Accordingly, risk and performance indicators can be reflected in a single measure. [Employee training is a source of risk and a driver of performance]. 
 
 
 
 
c)	Compare risk indicators and performance indicators using a diagram.   (p.282) 
Risk IndicatorPerformance Indicator
Purpose:Purpose:
•	Reveal the presence or risk• Demonstrate a result or outcome
•	Measure and monitor risks• Measure and monitor performance
•	Prevent and detect risks• Detect performance issues
Characteristics:Characteristics:
•	Best designed as a leading indicator• Often designed as a lagging indicator
•	Focused on sources of risk that may• Can be a leading indicator when have positive or negative effectsfocused on drivers of performance
Linkage with performance management:Linkage with risk management:
•	Manage risk-reward relationships • Identify performance issues that applicable to performance objectivesmay be caused by sources of risk
•	Risks can be drivers of performance• Drivers of performance can be risks
 
d)	What are the attributes of well-defined and meaningful risk indicators?   (p.283) 
•	Specific, clear, measurable, accurate and reliable 
•	Based on objective, credible and timely information 
•	Focused on critical sources of risk, causes of risk or drivers of risk 
•	Provide an early indication of risk (predictive ability)  
•	Well adapted and insightful for monitoring levels of risk 
•	Relevant and useful for making decisions on a timely basis 
•	Easy to maintain and update on an ongoing basis 
 
16. Integration with performance – Risk and performance indicator integration 
 
a)	Why should risk and performance indicators be reported together?   (p.283) 
Some organizations monitor risks separately from performance, while others integrate their monitoring. Both approaches add value. However, the integration of risk with performance demonstrates a much higher level of ERM maturity. The COSO ERM framework mentions that key risk indicators “should be reported in tandem with key performance indicators to demonstrate the interrelationship between risk and performance.”  Monitoring that combines risk and performance indicators contributes to risk management integration. 
 
b)	Who are the best individuals for developing risk and performance indicators?   (p.284) Risk owners and process owners are usually the most adept at developing meaningful indicators because of their intimate knowledge of risks and processes. In turn, they are the ones benefiting the most from having good indicators that help manage risks and processes to meet performance goals and objectives.  Risk owners and process owners are the nexus for risk and performance indicator integration. 
 
17. Integration with performance – Performance dashboards 
 
a)	Describe what a performance dashboard provides.   (p.284) 
•	Provides a visual representation of key indicators that resembles a control panel. 
•	Normally includes graphics along with summary analysis in the form of brief comments, descriptions or explanations. Often monthly or quarterly reporting, but can be real time. 
 
 
 
 
b)	What should a performance dashboard include?   (p.284-285) 
•	The most important drivers of performance and risks associated with organizational strategies and risk-reward relationships critical to organizational success. 
•	A summary of the results or outcomes achieved, along with information regarding the drivers [or enablers] of performance and the risks associated with the results and outcomes.  
•	A mix of leading and lagging indicators, along with analyses of causality and correlations between indicators (analyses of the cause and effect relationships affecting performance.) 
 
 
Other Short Answer Questions 
 
1.	What is integrated risk management?   (p.251) 
Integrated risk management is the management of risks holistically, using a well-coordinated approach across the organization. Risk management integration is a defining feature of ERM.  It addresses the issues associated with siloed risk management, without impeding the ability of management functions and business units to manage risks specific to their activities. Integrated risk management enables organizations to manage all of their risks in a structured and coordinated manner, taking into account the risk capacity, risk appetite and risk-reward relationships of the organization as a whole. 
 
2.	What are the main integration points and mechanisms for risk management?   (p.120, 251) • Plans - Strategic and business planning 
•	Policies - Policies for ERM and specific risks 
•	Processes - Process management 
•	Information - Management information systems 
•	Decisions - Decision-making structures 
•	Performance - Performance management 
 
3.	What should ERM functions provide in relation to each integration point?   (p.120, 251) 
•	Plans - Support to analyze risks relating to organizational strategies and objectives 
•	Policies - An ERM policy that  outlines risk ownership roles and responsibilities 
•	Processes - A risk management  framework and process that help manage risks consistently 
•	Information - Analyses and reporting of  risks from an organization-wide perspective 
•	Decisions - Support to ensure that decisions consider risks and risk management priorities 
•	Performance - Assistance for developing indicators of risk relating to performance objectives 
 
4.	Explain the reasons why risk management may not be integrated.   (p.252) 
Risk management integration can only happen by design, not by default. To achieve integration, organizations must make it a priority and plan their approach carefully. An important first step is to make the ERM leader and function responsible for risk management integration. Their performance objectives should include achieving integration in accordance with plans and desirable outcomes developed based on a recognized capability model. Risk management integration will not happen unless someone is responsible and accountable for it. The support and collaboration of senior executives, risk owners and process owners are also essential. 
If risk management is not integrated, it is because the foundation, structure and process arrangements needed to support integration are either not in place, insufficient or not functioning properly. In some cases, it is possible to revisit the arrangements already in place and make enhancements to them. The risk management framework can support or supplement these arrangements with integration mechanisms that fit organizational needs. Risk management professionals can design risk management frameworks that take into account the arrangements already in place and build upon them. 
 
5.	Explain knowledge and skills development as a foundation mechanism for risk management integration.  (p.252) 
•	Develop education and awareness sessions on the importance of risk management integration and the mechanisms for achieving integration. 
•	Diversify the ERM function with professionals from diverse backgrounds that are relevant for all important risk categories of the organization. 
•	Train risk owners and process owners on all important categories of risk, and how they need to support risk management integration. 
 
6.	Explain the ERM function as a structure mechanism for risk management integration.  (p.252) 
•	Establish an ERM function that is primarily dedicated to the roles of educator, advisor, coordinator and overseer of risk management. 
•	Maintain a common approach, tools and methodologies for risk management. Support management functions and business units in applying the approach and managing risks consistently and holistically. 
 
7.	Explain monitoring  as a process mechanism for risk management integration.  (p.252) 
•	Develop a comprehensive monitoring plan that covers all important risks, risk management actions and risk responses across the organization. 
•	Develop indicators of risk and risk management. Integrate these indicators with the performance measurement framework of the organization. 
•	Monitor the effectiveness of risk management integration mechanisms. 
 
8.	Explain the benefits of the Three Lines of Defense model.   (p.255-256) 
•	The Three Lines of Defense model provides a simple and effective way to clarify roles and responsibilities for risk management and control across management functions, and to illustrate how the functions can work together effectively. 
•	The underlying premise of the model is that three separate lines of defense are needed for effective risk management and control (…). When each line of defense performs its assigned roles and responsibilities, the probability of a significant breakdown of risk management and control is reduced. When the three lines operate effectively, there should be no gaps in risk management coverage, and no unnecessary duplication of effort in managing risks and controls.  
 
9.	Explain the first line of defense in the Three Lines of Defense model.   (p.256-257) 
The first line of defense is known as operational management. It includes the core and enabling functions of the organization. These functions must ensure that their activities are consistent with organizational goals and objectives, including those for risk management and control. Key actors include risk owners and process owners responsible for managing risks and controls within their areas of responsibility, in accordance with directions from senior management and the board. According to the model, risk owners and process owners identify and assess risks, and determine appropriate responses to risks. They also maintain effective internal controls, and implement corrective actions to address process and control deficiencies. The Three Lines of Defense model emphasizes the need to designate risk owners for all major risks. The model also proposes that risk owners should have meaningful and measurable objectives for managing risks and controls, and that their incentive-based compensation should include an appraisal of the risks assumed. 
 
10.	Explain the second line of defense in the Three Lines of Defense model.   (p.257) 
Management functions in the second line of defense are separate from the first line and report directly to senior management.  They are corporate functions that provide assistance for risk management and control. Their role is to help risk owners and process owners manage risks and controls effectively, and in accordance with directions from senior management and the board. In doing so, the second line of defense functions provide an objective assessment of management practices, and impartial feed-back to the first line managers, senior management and the board. (…) They may actively monitor risk management and control practices, and intervene if risks materialize. They are also responsible for providing a holistic view of risk and control information. 
11.	Explain the difference between internal and external control systems.  (p.258) 
An internal control system can be defined as the arrangements and activities that provide assurance that operations are carried out as intended to achieve organizational objectives. (…) When control systems refer to activities and arrangements within organizations, they are called internal control systems. In contrast, an external control system is applied externally to ensure that a purpose is achieved. For example, government entities develop laws and regulations, communicate expectations, request information and conduct inspections to verify compliance. These external control systems ensure that government policies and objectives are met. 
 
12.	Explain why internal control systems only provide reasonable assurance.   (p.258-259) Internal control systems provide reasonable assurance, but not absolute assurance.  Reasonable assurance implies that internal control systems can fail. Causes of internal control failures include poor judgment in designing controls, human errors in applying controls, management decisions to override controls, collusion to circumvent controls, and events beyond organizational control. 
 
13.	Explain the difference between an entity-level control and a process-level control.   (p.259) Illustrate your explanations with an example of each. 
•	Entity-level controls - are those applicable to the entire organization. For example, controls are established to provide assurance that strategies and operations are conducted in accordance with plans and budgets, and that course corrections, or plan and budget revisions take place when appropriate. Controls may consist of ensuring that board members and senior management review progress in relation to plans on a regular basis, and noting their decisions in minutes of meetings.  
•	Process and transaction-level controls - are those applied within management functions and business units. For example, a marketing function has a process for developing marketing campaigns. Controls are in place to supervise the process, and to review and authorize campaigns. 
 
14.	Explain the difference between the authorization and approval control activities.   (p.260) Illustrate your explanations with an example of each. 
•	Authorizations - initiate a process, activity or transaction and affirm their validity. They ensure that processes, activities and transactions are legitimate and carried out only if they are in accordance with plans and directions. Examples: Board authorization of a strategy, investment or policy before they are initiated or implemented. Senior management authorization of changes to a process and computer system before the changes are implemented. 
•	Approvals - are similar to authorizations. However, approvals generally happen after some activities are completed, as opposed to when they are initiated. Approvals ensure that transactions are consistent with policies and procedures. Examples: Board approval of senior executive bonuses based on results achieved. Management approval of payments to contractors based on work completed, and based on valid contracts authorized before the work began. 
 
15.	What is needed for controls to be effective?   (p.262) 
In order to be effective, controls have to be well designed and consistently applied.  
•	The design of controls is done by analyzing management systems, frameworks and processes, and determining what kind of controls are needed to obtain assurance that management practices and results are consistent with expectations.  
•	The application of controls takes places within the systems, frameworks and processes. There should be evidence that the controls are applied, especially for those involving authorization, approval, validation, reconciliation, and verification. 
 
16.	Why it is important to examine the design and application of controls on a regular basis?  (p.262) It is important to examine the design and application of internal controls on a regular basis. Concluding that internal controls are working well strictly based on results or outcomes achieved is not a prudent approach, because it only provides indirect assurance, also known as negative assurance. The fact that nothing seems to go wrong does not necessarily mean that management processes and controls are effective. 
17.	Explain how management control frameworks need to be well integrated with risk management, and the approach that should be followed in relation to risk appetite and tolerance.   (p.263) Management control frameworks need to be well integrated with risk management.  
In particular, the responsibilities assigned to senior managers should include managing risks to optimal levels, within risk appetite and risk tolerance targets. Moreover, managers should be rewarded only if acceptable levels of risk are assumed, and they should be sanctioned for assuming excessive levels of risks. On the other hand, management control frameworks should not be so rigid as to discourage managers from exploiting risks, resulting in a culture of risk aversion. In addition, management control frameworks should not create an environment where managers and employees are micromanaged to the point where they become disheartened and disengaged. Management control frameworks need to maintain an adequate balance between fostering innovation and entrepreneurship, while discouraging excessive risk taking and unethical behavior. 
 
18.	Explain what is a performance measurement framework and provide an example.   (p.264) A performance measurement framework, also known as performance measurement system, can be defined as an approach that determines the level of results achieved in relation to goals, strategies and objectives. The balanced scorecard is an example of a performance measurement framework.   It proposes that performance should be measured in relation to financial, customer, operational 
(internal business process), and learning and growth objectives. 
 
19.	Explain what is short-termism and how to avoid it.   (p.265) 
Short-termism is an excessive focus on short-term results to the detriment of long-term value creation. For example, bonuses based on annual profits may cause managers to avoid investments that are beneficial for the long term. Alternatively, bonuses that are based on sustained performance over multiple years, such as continued growth and profitability, influence managers to focus on investments for the long term. (…) A good practice is to define performance reward criteria that are linked to the performance measurement framework of the organization.  
 
20.	Explain how strategic planning and risk management have many commonalities.   (p.269-270) Both disciplines begin with analyzing the external and internal environment of the organization. Environmental analysis is done to identify forces and factors that need to be taken into account for developing strategies and identifying risks. Both disciplines also rely on analysis techniques to assess the soundness or merit of strategies and the significance of risks. Strategies involve exploiting opportunities and mitigating threats, which is akin to risk responses. By extension, the implementation of strategies is similar to the implementation of risk responses [applicable to strategic risks]. 
 
21.	Explain why environmental analysis is a critical step for the integration of strategic planning and risk management   (p.270) 
The first step, and perhaps most critical step for the integration of strategic planning and risk management is to develop a comprehensive environmental analysis that identifies all forces and factors that can influence strategies, including uncertainties associated with events, trends or conditions that present risks. It is much easier to achieve integration if everyone recognizes the importance of gathering information that meets the needs of strategic planning and risk management simultaneously. Strategic planning and ERM functions should perform environmental analysis collaboratively and work with the same information. 
 
22.	Explain how opportunities and threats are perceived in the context of strategy by comparison with risk management.   (p.272) 
•	In the context of strategy, opportunities are viewed as favorable conditions that can improve the performance of organizations, while threats are perceived as the opposite. Strategies should pursue opportunities that are best suited to organizational strengths. Organizations should also address weaknesses that impair strategies, and develop strategies that lessen the impacts of threats. 
•	In the context of risk management, opportunities are uncertainties that can positively affect organizational performance, while threats are uncertainties that can negatively affect performance. 
23.	What does scenario analysis require?   (p.273) 
Scenario analysis requires a willingness to challenge the assumptions underlying strategies. It also entails keeping an open mind regarding how things may unfold and affect strategies, resulting in various possible outcomes. 
 
24.	Provide an example that illustrates the difference between performance management and performance measurement.   (p.278)  
•	Setting a revenue target and measuring revenues against the target is performance measurement.  
•	Setting expectations for a sales team, observing behaviors, measuring performance, and taking corrective action to ensure that the target is met is performance management. 
 
25.	Provide one example of a leading and a lagging performance indicator for each of the following: Revenue growth, production quality, employee engagement.   (p.281) 
Objectives 	Leading Indicators 	Lagging Indicators 
Revenue growth 	New products developed 
Customer satisfaction levels 	Quarterly sales growth 
Product returns and complaints 
Production quality 	Employee training sessions Machinery inspections 	Product defect rate Machinery failures 
Employee engagement 	Employee satisfaction levels Employee job intentions 	Employee productivity 
Absenteeism and departures 
 	 
26.	Explain the three components of performance indicators (or risk indicators).   (p.281) 
•	Measure - basis of measurement based on the outcome sought (e.g. dollar, quantity, time). 
•	Metric - measurement method for gauging performance (e.g. measure, margin, ratio, percentage). 
•	Target - level of performance to achieve (e.g. revenue growth number or percentage). 
 
 
Multiple Choice Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Integrated risk management refers to: 
a)	The integration of the ERM function with all other functions and units. 
b)	The management of risks holistically, using a well-coordinated approach. 
c)	Risk management that integrates with strategic planning and decision-making. 
d)	The coordination of risk management efforts to prevent sub-optimal results. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.98, 251 
2. The most important areas where risk management integration needs to take place are: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	The same areas where integration is important for every other function and unit. 
b)	Strategic and business planning, organizational policies and processes, management information systems, decision-making structures, performance management. 
c)	The areas applicable at the entity level for applying the risk management process. 
d)	The integration points needed for applying the Three Lines of Defense Model. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.251 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
3. The three types of risk management framework integration mechanisms are: 
a)	Foundation mechanisms, structure mechanisms, reporting mechanisms. 
b)	Strategic planning, decision-making, performance management. 
c)	Risk analysis, risk assessment, risk evaluation. 
d)	Foundation mechanisms, structure mechanisms, process mechanisms. 
e)	Foundation mechanisms, process mechanisms, reporting mechanisms. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.252-254 
4. If risk management is not integrated it is because:   (select all that apply) 
a)	The organization itself probably does not operate in an integrated manner. 
b)	No one is responsible and accountable for risk management integration to happen. 
c)	The foundation, structure and process arrangements needed to support integration are either not in place, insufficient or not functioning properly. d) All of the above. 
e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.250, 252 
5. The Three Lines of Defense Model is: 
a)	A risk management framework. 
b)	A management control framework. 
c)	An audit and compliance framework. 
d)	A governance, risk and compliance (GRC) framework. 
e)	A guidance model on risk management and control roles and responsibilities. f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.255-258 
6. In the Three Lines of Defense Model, the first line of defense is: 
a)	The board of directors or equivalent. 
b)	Senior Management. 
c)	Operational functions that carry out the mandate of the organization. 
d)	Functions that provide risk management and control services or support. 
e)	Internal and external audit functions that conduct reviews and assessments. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.255 
7. In the Three Lines of Defense Model, the second line of defense includes: 
a)	Core and enabling functions responsible for operational management. 
b)	Risk owners and process owners responsible for risk management and control. 
c)	The ERM function and the internal audit function. 
d)	Corporate functions that provide assistance for risk management and control. 
e)	The internal audit function, external auditors and regulators. 
f)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.257 
8. In the Three Lines of Defense Model, the role of the second line of defense is to: 
a)	Manage risks in accordance with directions from senior management. 
b)	Provide independent assurance on governance, risk management and control. 
c)	Provide advice and support to risk owners and process owners for risk management. 
d)	Report risk and risk management information to the board of directors. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.257 
9. In the Three Lines of Defense Model, the role of the third line of defense is to: 
a)	Manage risks in accordance with directions from senior management. 
b)	Provide independent assurance on governance, risk management and control. 
c)	Provide advice and support to risk owners and process owners for risk management. 
d)	Report risk and risk management information to the board of directors. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.257 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
10. An internal control system is: 
a)	The structures, processes, approaches and methods that influence managers and employees to achieve organizational objectives. 
b)	The arrangements and activities that provide assurance that operations are carried out as intended to achieve organizational objectives. 
c)	The methods that help ensure that that risk management actions and responses are carried out as intended, appropriately and in a timely manner. 
d)	An approach that measures, monitors and determines the level of results achieved.  
in relation to goals, strategies and objectives. 
e)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.258 
11. The purpose of an internal control system is to: 
a)	Provide assurance that specific expectations (control objectives) are met. 
b)	Identify unintended actions, events or results after they occur. 
c)	Influence managers and employees to achieve organizational objectives. 
d)	Design, implement and improve processes to achieve goals and objectives. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.258 
12. Internal control activities are: 
a)	The activities and responses that organizations do for managing risks. 
b)	The methods that help ensure that risk management actions and responses are carried out as intended,  appropriately and in a timely manner. 
c)	The structures, processes, approaches and methods that influence managers and employees to achieve organization objectives. 
d)	Process activities and control activities that are internal to organizations. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.259 
13. Segregation of duties is: 
a)	Restricting physical or digital access to only authorized individuals. 
b)	Eliminating duplicate or wasteful activities by separating them among employees. 
c)	A detective control that involves one employee checking the work of another. 
d)	Separating duties among different people to reduce the possibility of errors, fraud  or misappropriations. 
e)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.260 
14. Preventive controls:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Are applied in advance of processes, activities or transactions taking place. 
b)	Help avoid unintended actions, events or results. 
c)	Identify unintended actions, events or results when they occur.   
d)	Are done mechanically or electronically by machines or computers. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.261 
15. Supervision is: 
a)	A detective control. 
b)	A preventive control. 
c)	A hybrid control. 
d)	A corrective control. 
e)	An automated control. 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.261 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
16. In order to be effective, controls have to be: 
a)	Well designed. 
b)	Consistently applied. 
c)	Well designed and consistently applied. 
d)	Evidenced in regards to their application. 
e)	Monitored and audited systematically. 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.262 
17. In the context of internal control, negative assurance is: 
a)	An audit report that has negative findings. 
b)	Assurance obtained indirectly based on results or outcomes achieved. 
c)	The difference between absolute assurance and reasonable assurance. 
d)	Monitoring, review or audit reports that are inconclusive. 
e)	Assurance obtained illegally or fraudulently. 
f)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.262 
18. Management control frameworks are: 
a)	The activities and methods that help ensure that risk management actions and responses are carried out as intended. 
b)	The arrangement and activities that provide assurance that operations are carried out as intended to achieve organizational objectives. 
c)	The structures, processes, approaches and methods that influence managers and employees to achieve organizational objectives. 
d)	The portion of risk management frameworks dedicated to governance and structure. 
e)	The structure that makes the Three Lines of Defense model actually work. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.263 
19. The following are components of management control frameworks: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Preventive and detective controls. 
b)	Responsibility centers. 
c)	Performance measurement. 
d)	Second line of defense. 
e)	Internal and external auditors. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	b) 
c) 	p.263-265 
20. A responsibility center is an organizational function or unit: 
a)	Headed by a manager who is responsible for its activities. 
b)	Responsible for developing a management action plan for risk management. 
c)	Responsible for managing costs in accordance with budgets. 
d)	Headed by a risk owner or a process owner. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.263 
21. In the context of management control, a performance measurement framework is: 
a)	An approach that determines the level of results achieved in relation to objectives. 
b)	A process for evaluating employee performance and deciding on promotions. 
c)	A discipline aimed at properly designing and continuously improving processes. 
d)	A process that sets expectations and targets, observes behaviors and actions, measures progress, and takes corrective action where appropriate. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.264 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
22. Strategic risks are:   (select all that apply) 
a)	The risks associated with the soundness and implementation of strategies. 
b)	The risks associated with new or existing strategies, but not avoided strategies. 
c)	The risks influencing strategy selection, and the risks affecting strategy execution. 
d)	The risks that are inconsistent with risk appetite and risk tolerance. 
e)	The risks of not having a clear mission and vision for the organization. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.266 
23. The following are risk management framework mechanisms that can be used for the integration of strategic planning and risk management (select all that apply). a) Leadership by the CEO, board oversight, , risk awareness and culture 
b)	Objective-centric perspective, attention to bias, risk profiling 
c)	Context analysis, risk identification, risk analysis, risk evaluation 
d)	Risk awareness and culture, knowledge and skills, risk ownership e) All of the above 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
d) 	p.268-269 
24. The following are risk management process mechanisms that can be used for the integration of strategic planning and risk management (select all that apply). a) Leadership by the CEO, board oversight, , risk awareness and culture 
b)	Objective-centric perspective, attention to bias, risk profiling 
c)	Context analysis, risk identification, risk analysis, risk evaluation 
d)	Risk awareness and culture, knowledge and skills, risk ownership e) All of the above 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 
c) 	p.268-269 
25. Risk sensing is: 
a)	A combination of advanced data analytics and human insights that help organizations identify, analyze and monitor risks. 
b)	Making sense of risks in the context of strategy and performance management. 
c)	Developing scenarios and models to gauge the causes and effects of risks. 
d)	A simulation that helps determine how to optimize risk-reward relationships. 
e)	Measuring risk levels to determine if they are within risk appetite and tolerance. f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.270 
26. A SWOT analysis is a method:   (select all that apply) 
a)	For grouping and analyzing environmental analysis information. 
b)	Used for analyzing strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats. 
c)	For developing scenario analyses, and for modeling and simulations. 
d)	Used for strategic planning, but not for risk management integration. 
e)	That helps swat teams identify criminal behavior before it happens. f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.271-272 
27. Scenario analysis is: 
a)	A structured method for grouping and analyzing information accumulated from environmental analysis. 
b)	The application of data analytics and human insights to help identify, analyze and monitor risks. 
c)	A structured approach for developing descriptive views of how the future may unfold and result in various possible outcomes. 
d)	The creation of a mathematical model to anticipate future scenarios. 
e)	The analysis of how disruptive trends and conditions can impact the future. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.273 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
28. Scenario analysis can be used for:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Developing  descriptive views of how the future may unfold and result in various possible outcomes.  
b)	Examining how emerging risks and disruptive trends may affect strategies. 
c)	Analyzing alternative strategies and determining how they may be responsive to uncertain events, trends or changes in condition. 
d)	Analyzing how external and internal forces may challenge business models, strategies and assumptions over a defined period. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.273 
29. Modeling is: 
a)	The creation of a mathematical model where variables are known, measurable and anticipated based on conditions and probability distributions. 
b)	The exercise of looking at how a model behaves under particular conditions and assumptions, as reflected by how independent variables affect dependent variables. 
c)	The development of scenarios to determine how the future may unfold. 
d)	The use of advance data analytics to identify, analyze and monitor risks. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.274 
30. A simulation is: 
a)	The creation of a mathematical model where variables are known, measurable and anticipated based on conditions and probability distributions. 
b)	The exercise of looking at how a model behaves under particular conditions and assumptions, as reflected by how independent variables affect dependent variables. 
c)	The development of scenarios to determine how the future may unfold. 
d)	The use of advance data analytics to identify, analyze and monitor risks. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.274 
31. A strategy risk profile is: 
a)	An overview of the risks applicable to a strategy. 
b)	A model or formula that calculates the risks applicable to a strategy. 
c)	An analysis of the strategic risks of the organization. 
d)	The output from a SWOT analysis. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.273 
32. Conceptually, the approach for developing a strategy risk profile is: 
a)	Based on a formula that calculates the total cost of risk. 
b)	Similar to developing a business case. 
c)	About measuring how to influence risk-reward relationships. 
d)	Similar to completing a scenario analysis for each strategy. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.276 
33. Performance management is: 
a)	A process that sets expectations and targets, observes behaviors and actions, measures progress, and takes corrective action where appropriate. 
b)	A process that sets targets and measures achievement in relation to the targets. 
c)	An approach that determines the level of results achieved in relation to objectives. 
d)	An approach for monitoring and evaluating individual employee performance. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.278 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
34. Performance measurement is: 
a)	A process that sets expectations and targets, observes behaviors and actions, measures progress, and takes corrective action where appropriate. 
b)	A process that sets targets and measures achievement in relation to the targets. 
c)	A balanced scorecard that is used for managing performance. 
d)	An approach for monitoring and evaluating individual employee performance. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.278 
35. The balanced scorecard is: 
a)	A performance management process. 
b)	A dashboard of risk and performance indicators. 
c)	A performance measurement framework. 
d)	A status report for reporting risk information. 
e)	A framework to evaluate the performance of employees. 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.279 
36. The four perspectives of the balanced scorecard are: 
a)	Financial, Customer, Supplier, Learning and growth 
b)	Strategic, Operational, Financial, Compliance 
c)	Financial, Customer, Supplier, Employees 
d)	Board, Management, Employees, External stakeholders 
e)	Financial, Customer, Operational, Learning and growth 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.280 
37. It is important to maintain an adequate balance across each perspective of the balanced scorecard: 
a)	Because doing otherwise would cause a performance management imbalance. 
b)	Since each perspective is a distinct strategy that requires integration with others. 
c)	To avoid focusing too much attention on activities that maximize financial performance for the short term, to the detriment of long term value creation. 
d)	Given that each perspective is tied to separate organizational strategies. 
e)	To maintain an adequate perspective of how different risks influence performance. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.280 
38. A performance indicator is: 
a)	A measurable value that demonstrates a result or outcome. 
b)	A graphic that is included in a performance dashboard. 
c)	A trend that indicates how performance is progressing. 
d)	A core measure included in the balanced scorecard. 
e)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.281 
39. A leading performance indicator is: 
a)	A measure of a result or outcome achieved. 
b)	A measure that is based on a driver or enabler of performance. 
c)	A graphic that is included in a performance dashboard. 
d)	A trend that indicates how performance is progressing. 
e)	A core measure included in the balanced scorecard. 
f)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.281 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
40. The three components of performance and risk indicators are: 
a)	A measure, a quantity and a target 
b)	A measure, a metric, and a target 
c)	A metric, a target, and a result or outcome 
d)	A metric, a ratio, and a percentage 
e)	A target, an effect, and a consequence 
f)	A target, a consequence, and an outcome 
g)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.281 
41. Examples of leading indicators for production quality include (select all that apply): a) Product defects 
b)	Employee training sessions 
c)	Equipment failures 
d)	Machinery inspections 
e)	Customer complaints 
f)	All of the above 
g)	None of the above 	b) 
d) 	p.281 
42. A risk indicator is: 
a)	A measurable value that demonstrates a result or outcome. 
b)	A signal that reveals the presence of risk and measures the amount of risk.  
c)	A graphic that is included in a risk management dashboard. 
d)	A trend that indicates how risk exposures are being management 
e)	A core risk measure included in the balanced scorecard. 
f)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.282 
43. A performance dashboard should include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	The most important drivers of performance and risks associated with organizational strategies and risk-reward relationships critical to organizational success. 
b)	A summary of the results or outcomes achieved, along with information regarding the drivers [or enablers] of performance and the risks associated with the results. 
c)	A mix of leading and lagging indicators. 
d)	Analyses of correlations and causality between indicators. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.284-285 
 
 
True or False Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Risk management integration works best when the integration points and mechanisms used are the ones already in place for integrating organizational functions and units. 	True 	p.119 
2. The most important areas for risk management integration are the same areas where integration is important for every other management function and business unit. 	True 	p.119, 251 
3. Integrated risk management refers to the management of risks holistically, using a wellcoordinated approach. 	True 	p.98, 251 
4. Integrated risk management refers to ERM applied on an organization-wide basis. 	False 	p.251 
5. The most important areas where risk management integration needs to take place are the same areas where integration is important for every other function and unit. 	True 	p.251 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
6. The most important areas where risk management integration needs to take place are the areas applicable to the Three Lines of Defense Model. 	False 	p.251 
7. The three types of risk management framework integration mechanisms are: 
foundation mechanisms, structure mechanisms and process mechanisms. 	True 	p.252-254 
8. The three types of risk management framework integration mechanisms are: 
foundation mechanisms, process mechanisms, reporting mechanisms. 	False 	p.252-254 
9. Risk management integration can only happen by design, not by default. 	True 	p.252 
10. Risk management integration will not happen unless someone is responsible and accountable for it.  	True 	p.252 
11. The ERM leader and function should be responsible and accountable for risk management integration. 	True 	p.252 
12. The Three Lines of Defense model was developed by the Institute of Internal Auditors. 	False 	p.256 
13. The Three Lines of Defense model is a risk management framework. 	False 	p.255 
14. The Three Lines of Defense model supports the governance and management structures component of the risk management framework. 	True 	p.114-118 
p.255-258 
15. The Three Lines of Defense model provides a simple and effective way to clarify roles and responsibilities for risk management and control across management functions. 	True 	p.255 
16. External auditors and regulators may be considered added lines of defense in the  Three Lines of Defense model. 	True 	p.257-258 
17. Senior management is the first line of defense in the Three Lines of Defense model. 	False 	p.255-256 
18. Risk owners are the second line of defense in the Three Lines of Defense model. 	False 	p.257 
19. Corporate functions that provide assistance for risk management and control are the second line of defense in the Three Lines of Defense model. 	True 	p.257 
20. Internal auditors, external auditors and regulators are the third line of defense in the Three Lines of Defense model. 	False 	p.257-258 
21. In the Three Lines of Defense Model, the role of the second line of defense is to provide advice and support to risk owners and process owners for risk management. 	True 	p.257 
22. In the Three Lines of Defense Model, the role of the second line of defense is to provide independent assurance on governance, risk management and control. 	False 	p.257 
23. In the Three Lines of Defense Model, the role of the third line of defense is to provide independent assurance on governance, risk management and control. 	True 	p.257 
24. In the Three Lines of Defense Model, the role of the third line of defense is to provide advice and support to risk owners and process owners for risk management. 	False 	p.257 
25. An internal control system is the arrangements and activities that provide assurance that operations are carried out as intended to achieve organizational objectives. 	True 	p.258 
26. An internal control system is the methods that help ensure that risk management actions and responses are carried out as intended, appropriately and on a timely basis. 	False 	p.258-259 
27. The purpose of an internal control system is to provide reasonable assurance that specific expectations (control objectives) are met. 	True 	p.258 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
28. The purpose of an internal control system is to identify unintended actions, events or results after they occur in order to determine how to prevent them. 	False 	p.258 
29. Internal control systems provide complete or absolute assurance that operations are carried out as intended to achieve organizational objectives. 	False 	p.258 
30. Internal control systems provide reasonable but not absolute assurance that operations are carried out as intended to achieve organizational objectives. 	True 	p.258 
31. Internal control activities are the activities that organizations do for managing risks. 	False 	p.259 
32. Internal control activities are the methods that help ensure that risk management actions and responses are carried out as intended,  appropriately and in a timely manner. 	True 	p.259 
33. An entity-level control is a control that applies to the entire organization. 	True 	p.259 
34. An entity-level control is a control that applies to one or more function or unit. 	False 	p.259 
35. A risk-based control is a control based on / adapted to risk. 	True 	p.260 
36. A risk-based control is a control that has risks of its own. 	False 	p.260 
37. Segregation of duties is the separating of duties among different people to reduce the possibility of errors, fraud or misappropriations. 	True 	p.260 
38. Segregation of duties is a detective control that involves one employee checking the work of another. 	False 	p.260 
39. Authorizations are approvals that happen after activities are completed. 	False 	p.260 
40. Authorizations initiate a process, activities or transaction and affirm their validity. 	True 	p.260 
41. Approvals generally happen after activities or transactions are completed, as opposed to when they are initiated. They ensure consistency with policies and procedures. 	True 	p.260 
42. Preventive controls are applied before processes, activities or transactions take place. 	True 	p.261 
43. Detective controls are applied before processes, activities or transactions take place. 	False 	p.261 
44. A hybrid control is one that combines more than one internal control activity. 	False 	p.261 
45. Preventive controls identify unintended actions, events or results when they occur. 	False 	p.261 
46. Detective controls identify unintended actions, events or results when they occur. 	True 	p.261 
47. Supervision is both a preventive and a detective control. 	True 	p.261 
48. In order to be effective, controls have to be well designed and consistently applied. 	True 	p.262 
49. Negative assurance is obtained indirectly based on results or outcomes achieved. 	True 	p.262 
50. Negative assurance is assurance obtained illegally or fraudulently. 	False 	p.262 
51. Positive assurance is obtained directly through control monitoring, review or audit. 	True 	p.262 
52. Management control frameworks are the structures, processes, approaches and methods that influence managers and employees to achieve organizational objectives. 	True 	p.263 
53. Management control frameworks are the arrangement and activities that provide assurance that operations are carried out as intended to achieve objectives. 	False 	p.263 
p.258 
54. Responsibility centers and performance measurement are components of management control frameworks. 	True 	p.263-265 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
55. Preventive and detective controls are components of management control frameworks. 	False 	p.263-265 
56. Management control frameworks assume that objectives are clear, and focus attention on the control environment needed for making an organization successful. 	True 	p.263 
57. A responsibility center is an organizational function or unit that is headed by a manager who is responsible for its activities. 	True 	p.263 
58. A responsibility center is an organizational function or unit that is responsible for developing a management action plan for risk management. 	False 	p.263 
59. In the context of management control, a performance measurement framework is an approach that determines the level of results achieved in relation to objectives. 	True 	p.264 
60. In the context of management control, a performance measurement framework is a process for evaluating employee performance and making decisions on promotions. 	False 	p.264 
61. The balanced scorecard is an example of a performance measurement framework 	True 	p.264 
62. Monitoring, measuring and reporting performance are management control mechanisms that create accountability for results. 	True 	p.264 
63. Performance management relies mostly on financial measures and indicators. 	False 	p.264 
64. People are more strongly motivated by punishment or sanctions than they are motivated by reward and recognition. 	False 	p.265 
65. Short-termism is an excessive focus on short-term results to the detriment of long term value creation. 	True 	p.265 
66. Short-termism is focusing on short term objectives that contribute to long term goals. 	False 	p.265 
67. Strategic risks are the risks associated with the soundness and implementation of strategies. 	True 	p.266 
68. Strategic risks are equally associated with new strategies, existing strategies and avoided strategies. 	True 	p.266 
69. Strategic risks are mostly driven by external factors such as the actions of competitors, disruptive trends, and disruptive technologies. 	True 	p.266 
70. The relationship between risk and strategy is dynamic, meaning that risks influence strategies, and strategies involve risks. 	True 	p.266 
71. The relationship between risk and strategy is static and one sided, meaning that risks influence strategies and not the other way around. 	False 	p.266 
72. Most organizations recognize the importance of integrating risk management with strategy and strategic planning. 	False 	p.266 
73. Every organization considers risks as part of its strategic planning. However, many do so intuitively and some do it unknowingly. 	True 	p.267 
74. The COSO ERM framework provides extensive guidance for the integration of risk management with strategy. 	True 	p.269 
75. The ISO 31000 Risk Management Guidelines provide extensive guidance for the integration of risk management with strategy. 	False 	p.269 
76. Strategic planning and risk management have many commonalities. 	True 	p.269 
77. Strategic planning and risk management have very few commonalities. 	False 	p.269 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
78. Risk sensing is a combination of advanced data analytics and human insights that help organizations identify, analyze and monitor risks. 	True 	p.270 
79. Risk sensing is a simulation that helps optimize risk-reward relationships. 	False 	p.270 
80. Risk sensing is done by identifying and monitoring risk indicators of events, trends and anomalies in structured and unstructured data from external and internal sources. 	True 	p.270 
81. Risk sensing is done by developing a model to simulate the causes and effects of risks. 	False 	p.270 
82. A majority of organizations use risk sensing technologies to identify risks. 	True 	p.271 
83. A SWOT analysis is a method for developing scenario analyses and simulations. 	False 	p.271 
84. A SWOT analysis is a method for analyzing environmental analysis information. 	True 	p.271 
85. Opportunities and threats are mostly identified through external scanning, while strengths and weaknesses are mostly identified through internal scanning. 	True 	p.272 
86. Scenario analysis is a structured method for grouping and analyzing information accumulated from environmental analysis. 	False 	p.273 
87. Scenario analysis is a structured approach for developing descriptive views of how the future may unfold and result in various possible outcomes. 	True 	p.273 
88. Scenario analysis can be used for examining how emerging risks and disruptive trends may affect strategies. 	True 	p.273 
89. Scenario analysis can be used for analyzing alternative strategies and determining how they may be responsive to uncertain events, trends or changes in condition. 	True 	p.273 
90. Scenario analysis can be used for developing an environmental scan of risk information. 	False 	p.273 
91. Modeling is the creation of a mathematical model where variables are known, measurable and anticipated based on conditions and probability distributions. 	True 	p.274 
92. A simulation is the creation of a mathematical model where variables are known, measurable and anticipated based on conditions and probability distributions. 	False 	p.274 
93. A simulation is the exercise of looking at how a model behaves under particular conditions and assumptions, as reflected by how certain variables affect others. 	True 	p.274 
94. A simulation is the creation of a mathematical model where variables are known, measurable and anticipated based on conditions and probability distributions. 	False 	p.274 
95. Modeling and simulation are relevant in the context of strategy and risk management. 	True 	p.274 
96. Modeling and simulation should focus on a limited number of key variables affecting strategies because only a few risks typically drive most of the exposure. 	True 	p.274 
97. Modeling and simulation should focus on a large number of key variables affecting strategies because many risks typically drive the total amount of exposure. 	False 	p.274 
98. A strategy risk profile is an overview of the risks applicable to a strategy. 	True 	p.275 
99. A strategy risk profile is a formula that calculates the risks applicable to a strategy. 	False 	p.275-277 
100. Conceptually, the approach for developing a strategy risk profile is similar to developing a business cases. 	True 	p.276 
101. Conceptually, the approach for developing a strategy risk profile is based on a formula that calculates the total cost of risk. 	False 	p.276-277 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
102. There is no specific approach for developing a strategy risk profile. It is simply a matter of adapting the risk management process to strategy. 	True 	p.275 
103. Performance management is a process that sets expectations and targets, observes behaviors and actions, measures progress, and takes corrective action where needed. 	True 	p.278 
104. Performance management is a process that sets targets and measures achievement in relation to the targets. 	False 	p.278 
105. Performance measurement is a process that sets targets and measures achievement in relation to the targets. 	True 	p.278 
106. Performance measurement is a process that sets expectations and targets, observes behaviors and actions, measures progress, and takes corrective action where needed. 	False 	p.278 
107. Setting expectations for a sales team, observing behaviors, measuring performance, and taking corrective action if needed is an example of performance measurement. 	False 	p.278 
108. Setting expectations for a sales team, observing behaviors, measuring performance, and taking corrective action if needed is an example of performance management. 	True 	p.278 
109. A good performance management process ensures that the end justifies the means. 	False 	p.279 
110. The balanced scorecard is a performance management framework. 	False 	p.279 
111. The balanced scorecard is a performance measurement framework. 	True 	p.279 
112. The four perspectives of the balanced scorecard are financial, customer, operational, and learning and growth. 	True 	p.280 
113. The four perspectives of the balanced scorecard are financial, customer, supplier, and employees. 	False 	p.280 
114. It is important to maintain an adequate balance across each perspective of the balanced scorecard because each perspective is a distinct strategy that requires integration. 	False 	p.280 
115. It is important to maintain an adequate balance across each perspective of the balanced scorecard to avoid focusing too much attention on activities that maximize financial performance for the short term, to the detriment of long term value creation. 	True 	p.280 
116. A performance indicator is a measurable value that demonstrates a result or outcome. 	True 	p.281 
117. A performance indicator is a trend that indicates how performance is progressing. 	False 	p.281 
118. A leading performance indicator is based on a driver or enabler of performance. 	True 	p.281 
119. A lagging performance indicator measures a result or outcome achieved. 	True 	p.281 
120. The three components of performance indicators are a measure, a metric, and a target. 	True 	p.281 
121. The three components of performance indicators are a metric, a target, and a result. 	False 	p.281 
122. Employee training sessions and machinery inspections are examples of leading indicators of production quality. 	True 	p.281 
123. Employee training sessions and machinery inspections are examples of lagging indicators of production quality. 	False 	p.281 
124. A risk indicator is a measurable value that demonstrates a result or outcome. 	False 	p.282 
125. A risk indicator reveals the presence of risk and measures the amount of risk.  	True 	p.282 
126. Risk and performance indicators can be reflected in a single measure. 	True 	p.282 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
127. Most drivers or enablers of performance are equally sources of risks. 	True 	p.282 
128. Risk indicators are most valuable when they are predictive. 	True 	p.283 
129. Risk management is more effective when both leading and lagging indicators are used. 	True 	p.283 
130. An effective approach for developing leading indicators of risks is to analyze real  or possible risk events, identify the sources and causes of risk, and determine what indicators should be used to anticipate the risks. 	True 	p.283 
131. An effective approach for developing leading indicators of risks is to analyze real  or possible risk events, identify the effects and consequences, and determine what indicators should be used to measure the risks. 	False 	p.283 
132. There are guidelines that suggest how many performance indicators and risk indicators an organization should have as part of its performance dashboard. 	False 	p.284 
133. Risk owners and process owners are usually the most adept at developing and integrating performance indicators and risk indicators. 	True 	p.284 
134. Developing meaningful risk and performance indicators is an easy task. 	False 	p.284 
135. A performance dashboard provides a visual representation of key performance and risk indicators that resembles a control panel. 	True 	p.284 
136. A performance dashboard includes performance indicators, but does not include risk indicators, which are normally reported separately from the performance dashboard. 	False 	p.284-285 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 7  
Strategy Risks 
 
 
Review Questions 
 
1. Nature of strategy 
 
a)	Briefly explain the nature of strategy.   (p.296) 
Strategy can be defined as the plans and approaches developed to achieve a higher level of performance and results. It represents a commitment to a combination of choices and methods that are expected to create value and make an organization successful.  Strategy reflects how an organization interacts with its external environment to carry out its mission and realize its vision and goals. It involves responding to opportunities and threats. It entails doing different things, or doing things differently than competitors. 
 
b)	What are strategic risks?   (p.296) 
Strategic risks are the risks associated with the soundness and implementation of organizational strategies. 
 
c)	Explain where strategic risks originate.   (p.296) 
Strategic risks are mostly driven by external factors such as the actions of competitors, disruptive trends and technologies, and how an organization chooses to exploit opportunities and respond to threats. However, strategic risks also originate from internal factors such as strengths and weaknesses, and the uncertainties assumed versus those transferred or avoided. 
 
d)	Describe the dynamic relationship between risk and strategy.   (p.296) 
Risks influence strategies, and strategies involve risks. Strategies result in failure if they are not responsive to external and internal environment risks, if they involve too much risk, or if the risks associated with their execution are not well managed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. External environment awareness 
 
a)	Illustrate the macro environment and competitive environment using a diagram.   (p.298) 
 
 
b)	Explain where known risks and emerging risks originate.   (p.298-299) 
•	Known and emerging risks originate from the macro environment.  
They also originate within the industry and competitive environment of an organization. 
•	Known risks are well understood because they have a history of occurrence and are easy  to anticipate and predict. They are part of the regular activities of an organization.  
•	Emerging risks are trends or changing conditions that become disruptive over time. 
 
c)	Explain environmental complexity and stability using a diagram.   (p.300) 
	Moderate to High Uncertainty	High Uncertainty
	A simple-dynamic environment involves a 	A complex-dynamic environment involves
	Dynamic	limited number of external forces affecting 	a large number of external forces affecting 
Environment	organizations (simple), but some significant 	organizations (complex), and many significant disruptive trends or technologies (dynamic).	disruptive trends or technologies (dynamic).
Industry examples: financial services, retail, 	Industry examples: manufacturing, publishing, news, agriculture, food processing.	automobile, healthcare, high technology.
Stability
	Low Uncertainty	Low to Moderate Uncertainty
	A simple-static environment involves a limited 	A complex-static environment involves a 
	Static 	number of external forces affecting organi-	large number of external forces affecting 
Environment	zations (simple), and few significant disruptive 	organizations (complex), but few significant trends or technologies (static).	disruptive trends or technologies (static).
Industry examples: governments, charities, 	Industry examples: tourism, transportation, not-for-profit research organizations.	construction, electricity, natural gas, mining.
	Simple	Complex
Complexity
	Environment	Environment
  
d)	Define disruptive trends and technologies.   (p.300-301) 
•	Disruptive trends are external forces that are evolving and have broad implications that are difficult to predict. They originate from external environment components such as political factors, economic conditions, social forces, etc. 
•	Disruptive technologies are methods, systems and devices that have transformative effects. They originate from inventions that are put to use in innovative ways. Disruptive technologies give rise to disruptive trends. 
e)	Describe two disruptive trends and two disruptive technologies.   (p.303) Students may choose from the following: Disruptive trends: 
•	Internet of things - smart connected products that transmit data for analysis 
•	Work automation - automation through artificial intelligence and robotics 
•	Mobility - shared automobiles, self-driving automobiles, alternative automobiles 
•	Globalization - interdependence between commerce for trade, capital, knowledge, etc. 
•	Climate change - rising temperatures causing extreme weather events, drought, fires, etc. 
Disruptive technologies: 
•	Artificial intelligence - computer systems performing tasks similar to human intelligence 
•	Advanced robotics - mechanical devices accomplishing physical tasks similar to humans 
•	Self-driving vehicles - vehicles that maneuver with reduced or no human intervention 
•	Augmented reality - technologies that overlay images (virtual objects) on the real world 
•	3D printing - creation of three dimensional physical objects layer by layer 
 
f)	Describe the power of customers per the five forces of industry competition.   (p.304) The power of customers (industry buyers) is the extent of the pressures that customers exert to obtain value through lower prices, improved quality, etc. Situations that result in power for customers include: 
•	limited product differentiation and excess production capacity 
•	customers that are well informed of product prices, quality, features, etc. 
•	large buyers that can exert pressure by negotiating lower prices 
•	cost of switching between industry competitors that is low or non-existent 
•	buyers that have the ability to integrate vertically into the industry 
 
3. Strategic leadership 
 
a)	What is strategic leadership?   (p.305) 
Strategic leadership is the ability to articulate meaningful goals, develop sound strategies for achieving them, and implement those strategies successfully.(…) Basically, strategic leadership is about determining what  an organization should try to achieve (goal), choosing the appropriate path to follow (strategy), and mobilizing the organization to complete the journey (execution). 
 
b)	Briefly outline the skills associated with strategic leadership.   (p.306) 
Knowledgeable - Discerning approach 
•	The strategic leader has in-depth knowledge of the field of strategy and differentiates strategy from business planning and budgeting. 
Perceptive - Open mind 
•	The strategic leader openly encourages employees to challenge assumptions, and emphasizes the need to analyze disruptive trends and technologies. 
Decisive - Clear directions 
•	The strategic leader makes decisions about existing and new strategies, and provides clear directions on the initiatives required for strategy implementation.  Responsive - Course corrections 
•	The strategic leader recognizes that strategy is a continuous process of adapting to changing 
conditions and does not hesitate to make adjustments. 
 
4. Strategy selection 
 
a)	What is strategy selection?   (p.309) 
Strategy selection is exploring strategies and making choices among them. It involves analyzing existing and alternative strategies, identifying the best options and making decisions. The decisions include maintaining, modifying or abandoning existing strategies, adopting new strategies, and eliminating other possibilities. 
b)	Briefly describe the main factors to consider when selecting strategies.   (p.311) 
•	Relevance to vision and goals - Strategies need to be consistent, otherwise direction is not clear.  May need to update vision and goals to pursue alternative strategies. 
•	Stakeholder needs - Need to balance the needs and interests of stakeholders otherwise they will withdraw their support or will not want to do business with the organization. 
•	Competitive forces - Need to position the organization in light of competitive forces.  
If competitive forces are strong, it will be difficult to earn an acceptable return on investment. 
•	Market homogeneity - Too much homogeneity leads to competition mostly based on price and makes an industry unattractive. Find ways to differentiate or to compete on price. 
•	Resources and capabilities - Strategies need to be consistent with existing resources and capabilities. If not, find ways to acquire the resources and capabilities needed. 
 
5. Market strategies 
 
a)	What is a low-cost strategy?   (p.314) 
A	low-cost strategy involves achieving lower operating costs in order to offer products and services at a lower price than competitors. When pursuing a low cost strategy, organizations relentlessly look for ways to produce at a lower cost.  
 
b)	Outline the conditions for success and risks of a low-cost strategy.   (p.314) 
•	Conditions for success - Works well in markets where customers are price sensitive, competition is intense, and products or services are similar or cannot be differentiated easily. The ability to lower supply chain costs, increase operational efficiency, increase sales volumes, capture economies of scale, integrate vertically, and sell directly to customers help develop a low cost competitive advantage. Constantly rethink business model to achieve lower costs. 
•	Risks of a low cost strategy: 
o	Price sensitive customers are generally not loyal customers. o Suppliers may look for organizational clients that are less focused on low costs. 
o	Cost reduction methods and technologies are often easy for rivals to copy. o An excessive focus on cost reduction limits experimentation and innovation. o Price reductions may be excessive, resulting in unnecessarily low profits. o Profitability is dependent on maintaining costs low and increasing volume. o Low profit margins diminish financial strength and create vulnerabilities. 
 
c)	What is a differentiation strategy?   (p.314) 
A	differentiation strategy involves offering distinctive features or superior attributes that appeal to a broad set of customers. When pursuing a differentiation strategy, organizations distinguish their products or services from those of competitors. They target customers that value the distinctive features or superior attributes and are willing to pay extra for them. 
 
d)	Outline the conditions for success and risks of a differentiation strategy.   (p.314-315) 
•	Conditions for success - Works well in markets where customer needs and preferences are diverse, customers value product or service differences, and few competitors pursue a similar differentiation. More effective when the distinctive features or superior attributes offered are difficult for rivals to replicate, or if they can be legally protected through intellectual property rights such as patents, trademarks or copyrights. Innovation and continuous improvement are essential, because rivals will inevitably try to offer similar features at a lower cost.  
•	Risks of a differentiation strategy: 
o	The success of a differentiation strategy rests on creative thinking and innovation. o Differentiation strategies drive up costs for research, production, marketing, etc. o An organization may overspend on differentiation leading to lower profitability. o Fixed production costs may drive down profit margins if sales volumes decline. o Customers may not value the differentiation enough to pay the asking price. 
o	Customers may try lower priced products and switch to low costs providers. o Higher prices generally reduce volume, market share and the potential for growth. o The differentiated products or services may be difficult to patent or legally defend. 
o	Competitors may eventually offer similar distinctive features at a lower price. 
 
6. Market leadership 
 
a)	Briefly explain market leadership styles.   (p.316-317) 
•	Prospector - the prospector market leadership style is to innovate, pursue opportunities and experiment with disruptive trends and technologies. Prospectors are preemptive and take the lead. They try to shape markets to their own terms. 
•	Analyzer - the analyzer market leadership style is to assess market opportunities and pursue them only if they appear to have a good chance of success. Analyzers are more cautious than prospectors, but willing to experiment with new trends or technologies. 
•	Defender - the defender market leadership style is the opposite of the prospector style. Defenders hold on to their market share and do not seek to innovate or disrupt. They resist change, and adapt to new trends and technologies only if they have to. 
•	Reactor - the reactor market leadership style responds to opportunities and threats in ad hoc fashion, without a clear long term vision, strategy or plan. Reactors go with the flow and adapt to changing environmental conditions as they surface. 
 
b)	When are market leadership styles a significant source of risk?   (p.317) 
Market leadership styles should adapt to environmental complexity and stability. For instance, a prospector strategy is advisable in a complex-dynamic environment, while a defender strategy is more relevant for a simple-static environment. Market leadership styles not adapted to industry conditions can be a significant source of risk [organization disconnected from its environment]. 
 
7. Business model strategies 
 
a)	What are business model strategies?   (p.318) 
Business model strategies are the plans and approaches that define how an organization interacts with its suppliers, and customers such as clients, constituents, patients, recipients of services, etc.  
 
b)	Explain outsourcing and the risks of this strategy.   (p.318) 
Outsourcing is the transfer of activities done by an organization to a service provider that accepts to do them for the organization on a contractual basis. (…) The service provider then becomes a supplier to the organization, based on the terms and conditions of a negotiated contract. 
Risks of outsourcing: 
•	Losing touch with activities that are critical to organizational success. 
•	Having less control over the activities outsourced. 
•	Becoming dependent on service providers. 
•	Services providers gaining access to commercially sensitive information. 
 
c)	Explain vertical integration and the risks of this strategy.   (p.318) 
Vertical integration is the amalgamation of external value chain activities within an organization. There are two types of vertical integration strategies, namely backward integration and forward integration. Backward integration is acquiring or merging with a supplier, or producing inputs internally instead of buying them externally. Forward integration is distributing or selling directly to end users instead of going through intermediaries such as distributors and retailers. 
Risks of vertical integration: 
•	Usually more costly than strategic alliances with suppliers or distributors. 
•	May not result in sufficient economies of scale to make the integration profitable. 
•	Complexities and challenges often underestimated (lack of knowledge and capabilities). 
•	Challenges to remain current with new methods or technologies. 
•	Can result in less flexibility to respond to changing environmental conditions. 
•	Generally not advisable in complex and dynamic external environments. 
 
8. Digital strategies 
 
a)	What are digital strategies?   (p.320) 
Digital strategies are plans and approaches developed to pursue opportunities associated with computer technologies. Digital strategies focus on disruptive trends such as the Internet of things and work automation, and the technologies behind these trends such as artificial intelligence and robotics. Digital strategies also emphasize data capture and analysis. 
 
b)	Why are digital strategies important for organizations?   (p.320) 
Organizations are compelled to develop a digital strategy because they become obsolete and an easier target for disruption if they do not. New technologies are pathways for new entrants to disrupt markets and industries. Start-up companies frequently enjoy advantages over large, established companies that fail to embrace new technologies.  Rapid advances in technologies can unsettle a competitive advantage or even redefine an entire industry in a short timeframe. 
 
9. Growth strategies 
 
a)	What are growth strategies?   (p.321) 
Growth strategies are plans and approaches for increasing market share and revenues. Virtually every private sector organization endeavors to grow. Not trying to do so can make an organization stall-out, or even regress when faced with competitive pressures. Many executives observe that firms must grow to remain healthy and avoid stagnation.   
 
b)	Briefly explain each type of growth strategy.   (p.321-326) 
•	Organic growth – Organic growth is the cultivation of existing business lines and markets. As the name suggests, it is analogous to growing a plant. 
•	Diversification - diversification is expanding into new business lines or markets. It involves offering products or services that are different from the ones already offered. 
•	Foreign Markets – Entering foreign markets is a form of diversification. However, it involves very different challenges compared with diversifying into new business lines or industries. 
•	Acquisitions – An acquisition is the purchase of a controlling interest (majority of shares) of an organization or a purchase of the assets of an organization.  
 
c)	Outline two risks for each type of growth strategy.   (p.321-326) Students may choose from the following: 
Strategy 	Risks 
Organic growth 	•	Slow growth. Easy to lose sight of opportunities because many are small and buried within business lines and operations. 
•	Middle managers may be reluctant to propose high risk, high reward opportunities. They don’t want to damage their careers. 
•	Affected by economic cycles - good opportunities overlooked during recessions, bad opportunities pursued during expansion. 
•	Labelling of business units as limited growth or high growth may cause dysfunctional behavior or pressure managers. 
Strategy 	Risks 
Diversification 	•	Lure of better growth in other industries can fool executives. Better chance of success if you stay in your industry. 
•	Insufficient knowledge and capabilities to manage diverse business lines, especially in different industries. 
•	Sub-optimal shareholder value compared with the aggregate value that might exist if each business line or company was independent. 
•	Manager may want to protect themselves from variable earnings even if cost of diversification outweighs benefits. 
Foreign Markets 	•	Consumer preferences can vary considerably between countries. Selling standardized products may or may not work. 
•	Establishing a physical presence in foreign markets is complex and risky. Disappointing results and failures are common. 
•	Political risks include unstable governments, corrupt officials, unfair trade policies or practices, insurrection, civil unrest, etc. 
•	Economic and financial risks such as business and consumer demand, interest rates, currency exchange, inflation, trade, etc. 
•	Not getting paid for goods delivered or work performed, and not being able to enforce contracts and payments. 
Acquisitions 	•	Government reviews and rulings; conditions imposed for an acquisition or merger to be approved. 
•	Paying a premium above market value to entice the shareholders to sell - paying too much for the acquisition. 
•	Integration approach not suitable with the strategic purpose and value creation potential. Ill defined strategic purpose. 
•	Differences in culture, resistance to change, incompatible processes and systems, job insecurities, departure of key employees, etc. 
 
10. Strategy execution 
 
a)	What is strategy execution?   (p.326) 
Strategy execution is the implementation of strategies. 
 
b)	Explain why a using dynamic approach is important.   (p.327) 
Depending on how much organizational change is required, the timelines for strategy implementation can take several months to several years.  It is therefore essential to recognize that course corrections will be needed along the way. A dynamic approach to strategy implementation is required for complex and/or dynamic environments. As such, the implementation approach needs to match the environmental conditions that strategies are responding to. (…) It is often necessary to adopt creative solutions or take advantage of unexpected opportunities when implementing complex strategies. 
 
11. Strategy evolution 
 
a)	What is strategy evolution?   (p.328) 
Strategy evolution is the continuous process of modifying strategies in response to changing environmental conditions, or signs that the strategies are not working well.  The modifications may be minor updates, major revisions or entirely new strategies. 
 
 
 
b)	List four challenges associated with strategy evolution.   (p.328) 
Many organizations experience challenges with strategy evolution. They include not recognizing market creating opportunities, having biases for continuing with existing strategies, being overly focused on short-term results, and not having the right structures for supporting innovation. Over time, the absence of strategy evolution causes organizational decline. 
 
12. Red ocean traps 
 
a)	What are red oceans and blue oceans?   (p.328) 
•	Red oceans - In the field of strategy, overcrowded markets with intense competition are called red oceans. In these markets, organizations continuously try to outperform existing rivals. Traditional strategic responses to red oceans are to further differentiate products, or drive down costs to preserve competitive advantages. However, these responses are not a guarantee of success, especially in markets with limited growth and intensifying competition. As markets increasingly become crowded, profitability and growth opportunities shrink. 
•	Blue oceans - When faced with red ocean market conditions, most organizations fight it out while others withdraw by selling business lines or assets to competitors. But some organizations, especially new entrants, take a completely different perspective. They imagine and create a new approach that generates demand and makes existing competitors largely irrelevant. These new markets are called blue oceans. 
 
b)	Briefly outline the five red ocean traps.   (p.328-329) 
•	Existing customers - overlooking the potential to sell to non-existing customers 
•	Existing strategies - choosing low-cost or differentiation and not thinking outside the box 
•	Existing markets - not paying attention to new entrants and disruptive trends or technologies 
•	Existing capabilities - not developing new or innovative capabilities, not being entrepreneurial 
•	Technology innovations - confusing technology innovation as market creating strategies 
 
13. Escalation of commitment biases 
 
a)	What are escalation of commitment biases?   (p.329) 
Organizations often persist too long with previously successful but failing strategies. Senior executives naturally develop biases in favor of existing strategies over new ones, especially if the executives were instrumental in selecting or implementing those strategies in the first place. Knowing when to transition from a winning formula to another is never obvious. It involves taking unknown risks. However, persisting with an old formula can be an even greater risk. Many biases cause senior executives to escalate their commitment toward existing strategies, even when it is becoming obvious that the strategies are no longer producing good results. 
 
b)	Describe three biases that cause escalation of commitment.   (p.329-330) Students may choose from any three of the following: 
•	Sunk cost fallacy – Justifying continuation of existing strategies on the basis that significant investments have already been made and that continuation is therefore the right thing to do. 
•	Loss aversion – Continuing with existing strategies mostly because abandoning them would lead to accounting losses due to investments or assets being written off.  
•	Illusion of control – Being overconfident about the strength of existing strategies, and developing  an attitude that the future can be controlled or is under control. 
•	Preference for completion – Wanting to complete a strategic initiative, or wanting to see things through with strategy implementation, mostly because of a desire to complete tasks. 
•	Pluralistic ignorance – Staying silent, thinking that you are the only dissenter when others in a group also remain silent for the same reason (aka the Abilene paradox). 
•	Personal identification – Identifying with an existing strategy and maintaining its implementation because it is tied to a personal commitment. 
14. Shot-termism 
 
a)	What is short-termism?   (p.331) 
Short-termism is an excessive focus on short-term results to the detriment of long-term benefits.  It is about maximizing profits or value for the short term, even if it negatively affects long-term performance. It prevents the evolution of strategy because senior executives are reluctant to make changes to existing strategies. In most cases, the executives are biased on short-term results because of their compensation arrangements. In other cases, they are mired in day-to-day operations and are too nearsighted, unable to imagine how strategies should evolve for the long term. 
 
b)	Outline four solutions to counter the risk of short-termism?   (p.331) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Having a clear long-term strategy and demonstrating progress along the way 
•	Ensuring that all board members are fully committed to long-term strategies 
•	Having a mix of executive performance incentives that influence long-term results 
•	Engaging investors to accept the need for maintaining a long-term perspective 
•	Resisting moves to meet forecasts if they are detrimental to long-term strategies 
•	Eliminating quarterly earnings guidance if they cause too much pressure 
•	Questioning existing strategies, and evolving strategies using a long-term focus 
 
c)	Briefly describe the zoom-out/zoom-in planning approach as a fifth solution.   (p.332) The zoom-out dimension looks at a time horizon of ten or more years to predict future market conditions and customer expectations. After the zoom-out vision is defined, organizations zoom in to the present and determine what they specifically need to do over the next six to twelve months in order to begin or continue their transition to the future. The zoom-out / zoom-in strategy approach can be summarized as follows: 
 
 
15. Innovation barriers 
 
a)	What are innovation barriers?   (p.332-333) 
Innovation barriers, namely internal conditions that impede the ability to innovate. These barriers discourage creativity and entrepreneurship by reinforcing compliance and conformity. Closedminded cultures and rigid management systems are the main barriers to innovation. The absence of a coordinated approach for managing innovation is also a barrier. 
 
b)	Briefly describe one innovation barrier.   (p.333) 
•	Closed-minded cultures - People who are not open minded about new ideas and possibilities. They lack imagination, are not willing to experiment, are always doubtful or skeptical. They see roadblocks instead of building blocks. They frustrate others trying to innovate. 
•	Rigid management systems - Siloed management functions and business units. Limited integration, too much bureaucracy, little room for employees to exercise judgment and experiment with alternative ways of doing things. Vertical hierarchies, formal structures. Obsession with policies and procedures, budgets, deadlines, short-term results. 
 
 
c)	Outline two techniques that can be used to counter the innovation barrier.   (p.333-334) Students may choose from the following: 
Closed-minded cultures 	• 	Make the expression of dissent a core value 
	• 	Solicit problems without pressuring for solutions 
	• 	Let creative people work by themselves 
	• 	Create innovation contests and evaluate managers 
Rigid management systems 	• 	Offer incentives for innovations 
	• 	Manage opportunities using a portfolio approach 
	• 	Provide entrepreneurial support for those who innovate 
	• 	Create cross-functional teams for innovative opportunities 
	• 	Create innovation incubators for experimentation 
 
16. Innovation strategies 
 
a)	What is an innovation strategy?   (p.334) 
An innovation strategy can be defined as a plan and approach that foster creativity and entrepreneurship within an organization. It helps identify where innovation is needed, where it is actually taking place, and where it may be lacking. It also helps integrate the various mechanisms required to support innovation, namely those that foster an open-minded culture, and those that enable flexible management systems. 
 
b)	Outline the categories of innovation using a table.   (p.335) 
Source 	Description 
Process 	Innovations associated with processes, methods, procedures, techniques, etc. 
Technology 	Innovations associated with mechanical devices, digital devices, computers, etc. 
Scope 	Description 
Incremental 	Innovations that modify or update existing processes or technologies. 
Radical 	Innovations that involve adopting entirely new processes or technologies. 
Target 	Description 
Products 	Innovations that target products or services sold externally or provided internally. 
Strategies 	Innovations that target market strategies, business model strategies, etc. 
 
 	 
17. Retrenchment strategies 
 
a)	What are retrenchment strategies?   (p.335) 
Retrenchment strategies are strategies that address profitability issues by reducing operational costs or divesting problem business lines or assets. They are adjustments meant to cut costs, improve competitiveness, and refocus the organization so that it can be more successful. 
 
b)	Briefly describe the two most common retrenchment strategies.   (p.335) 
•	Downsizing - Downsizing is a reduction in the number of managers and staff across management functions and business units. It typically does not change the scope of operational activities, but it makes an organization smaller and more agile.  
•	Downscoping - Downscoping is a divestiture or dissolution of selected business lines. As a result of downscoping, an organization is no longer involved with some operational activities. The proceeds from divestitures can be reinvested in other business lines, or may be applied to strengthen working capital or reduce debt. 
Other Short Answer Questions 
 
1.	What is the purpose of strategy?   (p.296) 
The purpose of strategy is to develop a competitive advantage or success formula that benefits the organization and its stakeholders. Strategy is intended to favorably position an organization within its industry, in a manner that leverages its resources and capabilities. It is about creating one or more distinctive elements that respond to targeted customer needs and preferences. 
 
2.	What is the most difficult aspect of context analysis?   (p.297) 
The most difficult aspect of context analysis is to develop a solid understanding of the macro environment of an organization, especially the disruptive trends and technologies that can undermine its strategies, business model, or products and services.  
 
3.	Explain what is a disruptor in the context of strategic risks.   (p.298) 
A disruptor is an organization that exploits disruptive trends and technologies to gain a competitive advantage in an industry. Disruptors can be existing suppliers, customers, competitors or new entrants to an industry. 
 
4.	Briefly explain what is a competitive environment and what are the five forces of industry competition model developed by Michael E. Porter.   (p.304) 
A competitive environment is the forces that create industry competition. These forces mostly originate from the stakeholders associated with an industry, and the disruptive trends and technologies affecting the industry. The five forces of industry competition model is a recognized framework for analyzing the competitive environment of an industry.  It proposes that the rivalry among industry competitors, the power of customers, the power of suppliers, the threat of substitute products, and the threat of new entrants are the main forces affecting profitability within an industry. The strength of each force and their interactions create the competitive environment. 
 
5.	Describe the power of suppliers per the five forces of industry competition.   (p.304) 
The power of suppliers is reflected by their ability to obtain better prices, terms and conditions for the products and services that they sell. Situations that result in power for suppliers include: 
•	supplier product differentiations that are key for industry competitors 
•	a strong demand for supplier products and a shortage of supplier capacity 
•	large suppliers that can exert pressures on industry competitors 
•	significant challenges or costs associated with switching to another supplier 
•	suppliers that have the ability to integrate vertically into the industry 
 
6.	Explain the importance of analyzing the competitive environment based on the five forces of industry competition model developed by Michael E. Porter.   (p.305) 
Organizations are unlikely to adopt sound strategies without a thorough analysis of their competitive environment. They may also overlook the extent that they should reconsider competing in a given industry altogether. In general, the stronger are the competitive forces, the more difficult it is to generate profits. (…) An industry is unattractive if one or more of the five forces of industry competition are excessively strong. An industry has a favorable outlook if the strengths of the five forces are weak to moderate.  But industries do not become unattractive overnight. Organizations need to analyze their competitive environment on a regular basis to identify competitive pressures and develop strategies that mitigate these pressures or circumvent them altogether. 
 
7.	What are indicators of weak strategic leadership?   (p.306) 
Knowledgeable - Discerning approach 
•	The strategic leader has limited knowledge of the field of strategy and confuses strategy with business planning and budgeting. 
Perceptive - Open mind 
•	The strategic leader does not challenge assumptions, and does not actively look for disruptive trends and technologies that could undermine the organization. Decisive - Clear directions 
•	The strategic leader is indecisive about strategy, biased toward maintaining the status quo, or does not provide clear directions for strategy implementation. Responsive - Course corrections 
•	The strategic leader sees strategy as an annual event and avoids making course corrections to the best extent possible for fear of losing face. 
 
8.	Why is weak strategic leadership a difficult weakness (source of risk) to point out, and what approaches can be taken by risk management professionals for mitigating this risk?  (p.307) 
•	Difficult to point out - Strategic leadership is one of the most delicate weakness to point out because it involves questioning the competence of those responsible to lead. This situation places risk management professionals in a very awkward position. Senior executives may or may not welcome constructive criticism on their strategic leadership.  
•	Approach #1 - Influence and create awareness:  For example, risk management professionals can outline the benefits of using an alternative process or method for developing strategies. They can also offer to participate in strategy formulation sessions, and take the opportunity to raise questions about assumptions, and the implications of disruptive trends and technologies.  
•	Approach #2 - Independent assessment or audit:  Request an assessment of strategy management practices from the internal audit function (the third line of defense) [or from external consultants]. 
When strategic leadership is deficient, it is normally reflected in the processes or methods used. Audit findings and recommendations help strengthen strategic leadership. 
 
9.	Outline three techniques that help organizations keep an open mind, challenge assumptions, or anticipate the effects of new trends and technologies as part of strategic planning.   (p.308) Students may choose any three from the following: 
•	Encouraging debate, creative thinking and experimentation with new ideas. 
•	Consulting broadly with stakeholders, especially employees, suppliers and customers. 
•	Conducting market research to understand the needs and preferences of customers. 
•	Actively monitoring new industry entrants and fast growing competitors. 
•	Attending industry conferences to discover new trends and technologies. 
 
10.	Identify the correct definitions for each bias related to strategic planning.   (p.308) 
1. confidence bias 	f) 
2. anchoring bias 	c) 
3. confirmation bias 	e) 
4. herding bias 	g) 
5. champion bias 	a) 
6. attribution bias 	b) 
7. survivorship bias 	d) 
 
a) assigning more merit to an idea based on who is proposing it 
b) falsely attributing success to factors of limited causality 
c) fixating on the past and not imagining new possibilities 
d) focusing on what works well and overlooking issues 
e) paying more attention to information that supports our views 
f) placing too much reliance on current strategies 
g) taking comfort in following what other people think 
 
11.	Explain why stakeholder needs are sources of risk when selecting strategies.   (p.310) 
Stakeholders have varying needs that have to be met, otherwise they can withdraw their support. Organizations cannot be successful unless their strategies produce results that are responsive to stakeholder needs.  Stakeholders and their needs can be summarized as follows: 
•	Customers - products and services of superior value at lower prices 
•	Employees - competitive salaries and acceptable working conditions 
•	Suppliers - fair prices and satisfactory terms and conditions 
•	Investors -  acceptable performance for investments, contributions or donations 
•	Communities -  responsible employment and environmental practices 
•	Governments - compliance to laws, regulations and public interest policies 
 
12.	Explain why capabilities are a better foundation than resources for developing strategies.   (p.311) 
•	Resources can be acquired, but capabilities need to be developed and are more difficult for competitors to imitate. Accordingly, capabilities provide a more enduring competitive advantage than resources, and are therefore a better foundation for developing strategies.  
•	If an organization does not have the necessary resources and capabilities, it has to adopt alternative strategies, or find ways to acquire the resources and develop the capabilities needed.  Strategies generally involve fewer risks if they leverage existing resources and capabilities. 
 
13.	Identify two sources of risk in each phase of the organization lifecycle.   (p.312) 
Phase 	Sources of risk 
Birth 	-	Limited resources and capabilities 
-	Product development and marketing 
-	Funding and cash flow challenges 
Growth 	-	Management structures and skills 
-	Rapid growth with limited infrastructure 
-	Production and profitability issues 
Maturity 
 	-	Slowing revenue growth and stagnation 
-	Excessive bureaucracy and overhead costs 
-	Complexity of operations, lack of integration 
Renewal 
 	-	Lack of creativity and innovation 
-	Complacency and resistance to change 
-	Inability to experiment and adapt 
Decline 
 	-	Failure to anticipate and manage decline 
-	Inability to realize value from divestitures 
-	Stakeholder backlash and lawsuits 
 
14.	What are the specific risks associated with a differentiation market strategy?   (p.315) 
Focused low-cost strategies have the same risks as low-cost strategies applied broadly. Conversely, focused differentiation strategies have the same risks as differentiation strategies applied broadly. 
However, they include additional risks associated with targeting a narrow market segment: 
•	Segment customer preferences may shift to products or services offered broadly. 
•	Market segments generally offer more limited profitability and growth potential. 
•	Broad market providers may decide to diversify into market segments. 
•	Competitive pressures may force some broad market providers into niche markets. 
•	Segment market providers may have challenges keeping up with technology changes. 
•	Market segments may have lower entry barriers and attract new entrants. 
 
 
 
 
15.	Explain the advantages and risks associated with first-mover market leadership.   (p.317) 
•	Adopters of new strategies, trends or technologies can acquire first-mover advantages.  
•	A first mover is an organization that initiates a strategic action to build or defend its competitive advantage. First mover advantages can provide great rewards, such as rapid growth, brand name recognition, customer loyalty, etc.  However, the rewards cannot be achieved unless risks are assumed up front by investing in new strategies, trends or technologies [with uncertain outcomes].   
•	A second mover is an organization that responds to first mover actions, typically through imitation. Second movers learn from the experience of first movers and avoid making the same mistakes. [Second movers take less risk and they sometimes undermine first-movers.]  
 
16.	Explain strategic alliances and the risks of this strategy.   (p.318) 
A strategic alliance is an agreement between two or more organizations that decide to work collaboratively for pursuing an opportunity. A strategic alliance can be established by contract or by creating a separate organization. (…) The purpose of a strategic alliance is to share resources, capabilities and risks while pursuing an opportunity. 
Risks of strategic alliances: 
•	Some alliance members may be opportunistic and try to take advantage of others. 
•	Members may not have a good culture fit. 
•	Members may eventually disagree on goals, strategies, objectives and responsibilities. 
•	Some members may not live up to expectations and commitments may be difficult to enforce. 
•	Alliances may fail due to disputes or irreconcilable differences between members. 
 
17.	Outline the risks associated with outsourcing and how they can be mitigated.   (p.318) 
Risks 	Mitigation 
Losing touch with activities that are critical to organizational success. 	Maintaining a close business relationship with their service providers. 
Having less control over the activities outsourced. 	Soliciting offers from other service providers from time to time to compare prices, terms and conditions. 
Becoming dependent on service providers. 	Select reliable service providers with back-up capabilities. 
Services providers gaining access to commercially sensitive information. 	Using non-compete agreements with service providers to ensure that they cannot become competitors. 
 
18.	Outline the risks associated with strategic alliances and how they can be mitigated.   (p.318) 
Risks 	Mitigation 
Some members may be opportunistic and try to take advantage of others. 	Carefully select partner(s) and understand their motivations. Culture fit, mutual respect and trust are essential conditions. There is a need to agree on goals, objectives and responsibilities. 
Members may not have a good culture fit. 	
Members may disagree on goals, strategies, objectives, responsibilities. 	
Some members may not live up to expectations and commitments may be difficult to enforce. 	Strategic alliances need to have clear terms of reference that are legally enforceable. Failure to perform responsibilities should have consequences. 
Disputes or irreconcilable differences may occur between members. 	Governance and dispute resolution mechanisms should be built-in the contract or agreement. Conditions withdrawal, compensation to other members, and dissolution of the alliance should be negotiated in advance. 
 
19.	Outline the risks associated with vertical integration and how they can be mitigated.   (p.318) 
Risks 	Mitigation 
More costly than strategic alliances with suppliers or distributors. 	Note: 
The textbook does not outline how the risks of vertical integration can be mitigated. Students must use their judgment in order to come up with mitigation strategies. 
•	Develop a business case for the integration in order to determine whether it provides enough benefits. 
•	Consider buying an existing supplier or distributor as opposed to trying to integrate vertically from scratch. 
•	Ensure that those responsible for the new activities have the right competencies, skills and experience. 
•	Avoid in a complex or dynamic environment. 
May not result in sufficient economies of scale to be profitable. 	
Complexities and challenges are often underestimated. 	
Challenges to remain current with new methods or technologies. 	
Can result in less flexibility to respond to changing conditions. 	
Generally not advisable in complex and dynamic external environments. 	
 
20.	Outline two risks associated with digital strategies.   (p.302) 
•	The strategy may be shortsighted (not look far enough into the future). 
•	The strategy may place to much reliance on a single scenario. 
•	The strategy may be perceived as a fait accompli [when it needs to evolve]. 
•	Digital strategies are difficult to implement - challenges include lack of leadership, limited expertise, lack of vision, low risk appetite, inertia, resistance to change, limited alignment. 
 
21.	Outline the risks associated with digital strategies and how they can be mitigated.   (p.318) 
Risks 	Mitigation 
Not looking far enough into the future 	Zoom out and Zoom in approach Carefully examine all possibilities. 
Placing too much reliance on one scenario 	Keep an open mind about all possible scenarios. 
Avoid bias - encourage all views to be expressed. 
Perceived as a fait accompli  	Respond to changing conditions 
Review and update strategies on a continuous basis. 
Implementation challenges 	Awareness through training and education 
Hire talented individuals with expertise and experience 
Translate the strategy into smart objectives 
Assign responsibilities, establish performance incentives 
Create collaborative structures for alignment 
Value experimentation, provide resources for it 
Create a separate organization for experimentation 
Test new concepts and move quickly to market 
 
22.	Digital strategy challenges include lack of leadership, limited technological expertise, lack of a common vision, low risk appetite, organization inertia, resistance to change, and lack of alignment. 
Outline techniques that can be used for mitigating these risks.  (p.320-321) 
•	Create an awareness of digital opportunities through training and education. 
•	Look to hire talented individuals and consider acquiring start-up companies. 
•	Translate digital strategies into distinct initiatives supported with smart objectives. 
•	Assign leaders to digital initiatives and establish performance incentives. 
•	Create collaborative structures such as cross-functional implementation teams. 
•	Value experimentation and provide the necessary resources to do so. 
•	Create a separate organization, business line or process to test new concepts. 
•	Move solutions quickly to market once the new concepts are proven. 
23.	How should the following risks of growth strategies be mitigated?   (p.321-326) 
Strategy and risk 	Mitigation 
Organic growth 
Managers may be reluctant to propose high risk, high reward opportunities. They may be afraid that failure will damage their career. 	 
Provide incentives for bold initiatives. 
Commit to additional resources if required. 
Reward managers for trials and success. 
Diversification 
Insufficient knowledge, capabilities and expertise to manage diverse business lines, especially in different industries. 	Hire managers experienced with the new business lines. Give them flexibility to make decisions. Motivate with long term performance incentives. Make them accountable. 
Foreign Markets 
Political risks include unstable governments, corrupt officials, unfair trade policies or practices, insurrection, civil unrest, etc. 	Avoid high risk countries based on World Bank information and Transparency International. Produce goods in different countries and move production to lower risk countries. 
Acquisitions 
Ill defined strategic purpose. Integration approach not suitable with the strategic purpose and value creation potential.  	Clearly define and communicate the strategic purpose and value creation potential. Adapt structures and integration approaches to realize the full potential of the acquisition. 
 
24.	What makes strategy execution so difficult?  (p.326-327) 
Management functions and business units have to work collaboratively and coordinate their activities for strategy implementation to be successful. However, coordination is very difficult to achieve if organizational alignment is lacking. Experienced managers know that it is much easier to develop a strategic plan than to implement strategies and achieve desirable outcomes. (…) Many of the challenges encountered for strategy implementation are caused by internal dysfunctions, including not having the right mindset and approach. Organizational alignment is critical for strategy execution, because the implementation of strategies rests on clear directions, collaborative teamwork, and a structured but flexible approach. The approach needs to be responsive to changing conditions. 
Strategy execution is difficult mostly because it involves managing change. Change requires organizations to be flexible and responsive. However, change is uncomfortable, often complex, and prone to resistance by managers and staff.  (p.378) 
 
25.	Why is strategy execution a major source of risk?   (p.326) 
Studies consistently indicate that two-thirds to three-quarters of large organizations struggle to implement their strategies.  Many strategies are not implemented successfully. (…) Organizations stagnate and decline when unable to implement their strategies. The fact that most organizations operate in a dynamic and/or complex environment compounds the risk of stagnation and decline, because organizations may become obsolete more quickly. Not being able to implement a strategy is equivalent to not having one, and not having a strategy evidently leads to failure. Until a strategy is implemented successfully, it remains wishful thinking and it is essentially worthless. 
 
26.	Outline two techniques that help prevent escalation of commitment biases in regards to existing strategies (bonus point if a third technique is provided).   (p.330) Students may choose from any of the following: 
•	Developing an awareness of escalation of commitment biases 
•	Creating an organizational culture where healthy debate and dissent are encouraged 
•	Asking the rights questions, challenging assumptions and keeping an open mind 
•	Ensuring that everyone has the opportunity to speak during strategic planning sessions 
•	Establishing diverse strategic planning teams to obtain different views 
•	Providing anonymous feed-back channels for managers to critique strategies 
•	Considering alternatives to existing strategies and experimenting with some of them 
•	Assigning strategy implementation to executives that did not propose the strategies 
•	Obtaining the views of external strategy experts on existing strategies and alternatives 
•	Ensuring that performance incentives do not cause escalation of commitment 
•	Reflecting on the results of prior strategies and learning from experience 
 
27.	Briefly describe the prospective hindsight method for mitigating escalation of commitment biases in regards to existing strategies.   (p.330-331) 
Prospective hindsight can be defined as a method of simulated failure analysis to identify potential causes that can lead to failure. It is applied before a strategy is implemented or continued. It is meant to prevent overconfidence by imagining that a contemplated or existing strategy has failed, and asking executives to come up with possible explanations as to why the failure has occurred. Prospective hindsight can be conducted in focus groups or by separate individuals. It forces executives to consider the possibility of failure and identify possible explanations. 
 
28.	What are the direct effects of not having an innovation strategy?  (p.335) 
Without an innovation strategy, creative ideas may not be actively solicited, and entrepreneurial proposals may not be effectively managed. It may also not be possible to have a clear picture of where innovation contributes to organizational success, and where it may be lacking. Much effort may be spent with limited results if organizational units are not acting with a collaborative and coordinated approach to innovation. In the long run, organizations that do not have an innovation strategy are less likely to perform and remain relevant in their industry. 
 
 
Multiple Choice Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Strategy can be defined as: 
a)	The plans and approaches developed to achieve a higher level of performance. 
b)	The approach to analyze the external environment and make decisions. 
c)	The analysis of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats. 
d)	The responses that an organization makes for manage risks more effectively. 
e)	The business plans to carry out the mission and vision of the organization. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 	p.296 
2. The purpose of strategy is to: 
a)	Develop a competitive advantage or success formula that benefits the organization and its stakeholders. 
b)	Position an organization within its industry, in a manner that leverages its resources and capabilities. 
c)	Create one or more distinctive elements that respond to targeted customer needs and preferences. 
d)	All of the above. 
e)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.296 
3. Strategic risks are: 
a)	The risks involved with the implementation of strategies. 
b)	The risks identified as part of the analysis of the external environment. 
c)	The risks having to do with how an organization defines its business model. 
d)	The risks associated with the soundness and implementation strategies. 
e)	The risks that organizations decides to assume instead of transferring. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	d) 	p.296 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
4. The most difficult aspect of context analysis is: 
a)	To apply a method that works well and that integrates with strategic planning. 
b)	To identify which opportunities threats are relevant to the organization. 
c)	To develop a solid understanding of the macro environment of an organization, especially the disruptive trends and technologies that can undermine its strategies.  
d)	To develop a context paper that summarizes the results of the analysis. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.297 
5. Which of the following statements are true?   (select all that apply) 
a)	Organizations do not focus enough attention on emerging risks. 
b)	Organizations pay more attention to existing competitors than disruptors. 
c)	A disruptor is an organization that exploits disruptive trends and technologies. 
d)	Disruptors can be suppliers, customers, competitors or new entrants to an industry. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.298-299 
6. Disruptive trends are: 
a)	External forces evolving and having broad implications that are difficult to predict. 
b)	Methods, systems and devices that have transformative effects. 
c)	Disturbances that are not well understood and anticipated. 
d)	Trends or technologies created by organizations to gain a competitive advantage. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.300 
7. Examples of disruptive trends include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Internet of things and work automation 
b)	Globalization and climate change 
c)	Artificial intelligence and advanced robotics 
d)	Augmented reality and 3D printing 
e)	All of the above 
f)	None of the above 	a) 
b) 	p.302-303 
8. A competitive environment is: 
a)	An industry that is unattractive because prices and profitability are too low. 
b)	A market that is regulated for greater competition among market participants. 
c)	An environment where goods or services are offered by more than one vendor. 
d)	A procurement process that solicits bids from at least three different suppliers. 
e)	The forces that create competition, which originate from the stakeholders associated with an industry, and the disruptive trends and technologies affecting the industry.
f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	e) 	p.304 
9. The five forces of industry competition model suggests that an industry is unattractive if: 
a)	One or more of the five forces of industry competition are excessively strong. 
b)	At least two of the five forces of industry competition are excessively strong. 
c)	Three ore more of the five forces of industry competition are excessively strong. 
d)	All five forces of industry competition are excessively strong. 
e)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.305 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
10. Which of these situations create power for customers in a given industry: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Limited product differentiation and excess production capacity. 
b)	A strong demand for supplier products and a shortage of supplier capacity. 
c)	Cost of switching between industry competitors that is low or non-existent. 
d)	Large suppliers that can exert pressures on industry competitors. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.304 
11. Situations that augment the threat of new entrants include the following: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Profitable or growth industries that attract investors and capital. 
b)	Strong entry barriers that require large investments or advanced knowledge. 
c)	Limited cost advantages or brand superiority enjoyed by industry competitors. 
d)	Large number of competitors of similar size and strength. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.304 
12. Strategic leadership is: 
a)	The ability to correctly analyze the competitive environment using the five forces of industry competition model developed by Michael E. Porter. 
b)	The ability to inspire and direct people to reach organizational goals. 
c)	The ability to articulate meaningful goals, develop sound strategies for achieving them, and implement those strategies successfully. 
d)	The ability to identify risks influencing strategies and affecting their implementation. 
e)	The ability to develop a mission, vision, values and smart objectives. f) None of the above. 	c) 	p.305 
13. Strategic leadership skills include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Being knowledgeable about strategy and establishing a discerning approach. 
b)	Being perceptive about trends and technologies, and keeping an open mind. 
c)	Providing clear directions and acting decisively about the path to follow. 
d)	Being responsive to changing conditions and willing to make course corrections. 
e)	 All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.306-309 
14. Signs of weak strategic leadership include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Limited knowledge of strategy, confusion of strategy with business planning. 
b)	Not challenging assumptions, not considering disruptive trends and technologies. 
c)	Being indecisive about strategies, bias toward maintaining the status quo. 
d)	Not providing clear directions for strategy implementation. 
e)	Not considering the need to update or revise strategies on a continuous basis. 
f)	Not wanting to make course corrections for fear of losing face. 
g)	 All of the above. 
h) None of the above. 	g) 	p.306-309 
15. Strategy selection involves:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Analyzing existing and alternative strategies. 
b)	Maintaining, modifying or abandoning existing strategies. 
c)	Adopting new strategies. 
d)	Eliminating possible strategy options. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.309 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
16. The main factors to consider in strategy selection include:   (select all that apply) 
a) Relevance to vision and goals. 
b)	Stakeholder needs. 
c)	Market strengths and weaknesses. 
d)	Competitor resources and capabilities. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.311 
17. Stakeholder needs are a source of risk when selecting strategies because: 
a)	Stakeholders want products and services of superior value at lower prices. 
b)	Stakeholders may purchase fewer products and services. 
c)	Stakeholders can withdraw their support. 
d)	Stakeholders may alert social media that competition is unfair. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.310 
18. The following sources of risk occur during the growth phase of the organizational lifecycle: 
a)	Limited resources and capabilities. 
b)	Management structures and skills. 
c)	Complexity of operations and lack of integration. 
d)	Complacency and resistance to change. 
e)	Failure to anticipate and manage possible decline. 
f)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.312 
19. The following sources of risk occur during the maturity phase of the organizational lifecycle: 
a)	Funding and cash flow challenges 
b)	Management structures and skills 
c)	Excessive bureaucracy and overhead costs 
d)	Complacency and resistance to change 
e)	Inability to realize value from divestitures 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.312 
20. Low-cost market strategies involve the following risks:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Price sensitive customers which are usually not loyal customers. 
b)	Suppliers may look for organizational clients not focused on low costs. 
c)	Cost reduction methods and technologies are difficult and painful to implement. 
d)	Low cost strategies drive up costs for research, production, marketing, etc. 
e)	Higher prices may reduce volume, market share and the potential for growth. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.314 
21. Differentiation market strategies involve the following risks:  (select all that apply) 
a)	The success of a differentiation strategy rests on creative thinking and innovation. 
b)	An organization may overspend on differentiation leading to lower profitability. 
c)	Suppliers may look for organizational clients that are focused on low costs. 
d)	Profitability is dependent on maintaining costs low and increasing volume. 
e)	Low profit margins diminish financial strength and create vulnerabilities. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.315 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
22. Focused market strategies involve the following specific risks:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Market segments generally offer more limited profitability and growth potential. 
b)	Broad market providers may decide to diversify into market segments. 
c)	High entry barriers may prevent broad market providers from competing. 
d)	Suppliers may look for organizational clients less focused on low costs. 
e)	Customers may try lower priced products and switch to low-cost providers. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.315 
23. A market leadership style not adapted to industry conditions can be a significant source of risk because: 
a)	It may be disconnected from environmental complexity and stability. 
b)	It may be inappropriate in relation to stakeholder expectations. 
c)	It may be inconsistent with the lifecycle stage of the organization. 
d)	It may not be relevant for the market strategy of the organization. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.317 
24. The prospector market leadership style is adapted to:  (select all that apply) a) A low-cost market strategy. 
b)	A differentiation strategy. 
c)	A complex-dynamic environment. 
d)	A simple-static environment. 
e)	A business model strategy. 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.317 
25. A first mover market leadership approach involves:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Initiating a strategic action to build or defend a competitive advantage. 
b)	Assuming risks by investing in new strategies, trends or technologies. 
c)	Responding to competitive pressures through imitation or differentiation. 
d)	Abandoning one industry for another when cost pressures are too intense. 
e)	Selecting a new market strategy and abandoning an old one. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.317 
26. Risks associated with outsourcing strategies include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Losing touch with activities that are critical to organizational success. 
b)	Becoming dependent on service providers. 
c)	Services providers being opportunistic and wanting to make a profit. 
d)	Strategies that do not contribute to efficient vertical integration. 
e)	Arrangements that are not compatible with existing market strategies. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.318 
27. Risks associated with strategic alliances include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Members being opportunistic and trying to take advantage of others. 
b)	Members not living up to expectations or assuming their responsibilities. 
c)	Members gaining access to information not related to the strategic alliance. 
d)	Alliance activities inconsistent with existing market strategies. 
e)	Alliance activities incompatible with business model strategies. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.318-319 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
28. Risks associated with vertical integration include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Can be more costly than outsourcing or strategic alliances. 
b)	Insufficient economies of scale to make the integration profitable. 
c)	Complexities and challenges of integration often underestimated. 
d)	Challenges to remain current with new methods and technologies. 
e)	Less flexibility to respond to changing conditions. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	f) 	p.319 
29. Digital strategies are: 
a)	Plans and approaches for pursuing opportunities related to computer technologies.  
b)	The conversion of information into data for processing and automation. 
c)	The implementation of disruptive trends associated with information and data. 
d)	The implementation of artificial intelligence and robotics to facilitate automation. 
e)	The creation of algorithms that can analyze information and make decisions. f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.320 
30. Organizations are compelled to develop digital strategies because: 
a)	They want to pursue opportunities associated with computer technologies. 
b)	They become obsolete and an easier target for disruption if they do not. 
c)	Trends and changing conditions are part of their complex-dynamic environment. 
d)	They need to meet stakeholder expectations for growth. 
e)	Digital strategies provide better mechanisms for diversification.
f)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.320 
31. Which of the following risks are related to digital strategies:  (select all that apply) 
a)	The strategy may be shortsighted (not look far enough into the future). 
b)	The strategy may place too much reliance on a single scenario. 
c)	The strategy continues to evolve when it should remain constant. 
d)	The strategy can easily be imitated by competitors who can disrupt. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.320 
32. Growth strategies include the following: 
a)	Organic growth, diversification, foreign markets, acquisitions 
b)	Organic growth, vertical integration, foreign markets, differentiation 
c)	Organic growth, differentiation, mergers, acquisitions 
d)	Organic growth, broad market coverage, differentiation, diversification 
e)	Organic growth, strategic alliances, vertical integration, diversification f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.321-326 
33. Organic growth has the following risks:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Easy to lose sight of opportunities that are small and buried within business lines. 
b)	Managers propose too many opportunities that can be pursued favorably. 
c)	Economic cycles influence whether good or bad opportunities are pursued. 
d)	Business units labelled as high growth are targeted for acquisition by competitors e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.321-322 





Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
34. Diversification as a growth strategy involves the following risks: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Executives lured by the potential growth in other industries. 
b)	Executives that have motives inconsistent with value creation.  
c)	Executives with limited knowledge and expertise in new business lines. 
d)	Executives overly optimistic about prospects in another industry. 
e)	All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.322 
35. Entering foreign markets as a growth strategy has the following risks: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Consumer preferences that may vary considerably across markets. 
b)	Political risks of unstable governments, corrupt officials, unfair trade policies, etc. 
c)	Economic and financial risks such as consumer demand, interest rates, inflation, etc. 
d)	Not getting paid and being unable to enforce contracts or payments. 
e)	All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.323-324 
36. Acquisitions as a growth strategy have the following risks:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Unfavorable financing conditions imposed by financial institutions. 
b)	Paying a price below market value resulting in lawsuits from shareholders. 
c)	Integration approaches unsuitable to the strategic purpose of the acquisition. 
d)	Differences in culture, resistance to change, incompatible processes and systems. 
e)	 All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.324-326 
37. Strategy execution is a major source of risk because: 
a)	Not being able to implement a strategy is equivalent to not having one. 
b)	Organizations stagnate and decline when unable to implement their strategies. 
c)	It requires having a good strategy that makes sense in the first place. 
d)	A dynamic approach is required when implementing strategies. 
e)	Two-thirds to three-quarters of large organizations struggle to implement strategies. f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.326 
38. Strategy execution is difficult because:  (select all that apply) 
a)	No one is in charge and accountable for strategy implementation. 
b)	It is much easier to develop a plan than to actually implement it. 
c)	Organizational alignment is often lacking or deficient. 
d)	It requires clear directions, collaborative teamwork and a flexible approach. 
e)	Human nature is such that there is often a lot of talk but very little action. 
f)	The chief executive officer often has no idea where to start and how to do it. g) All of the above. 
h) None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.327 
39. The challenges associated with strategy evolution are:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Not recognizing market creating opportunities. 
b)	Having biases for continuing with existing strategies. 
c)	Being overly focused on long-term results. 
d)	Supporting innovation to the detriment of existing strategies. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.328 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
40. In the field of strategy, red oceans are: 
a)	Markets where seafood products are favored by consumers. 
b)	Underserved markets where consumers are eager to purchase goods and services. 
c)	Markets where political and economic risks are significant. 
d)	Overcrowded markets with intense competition. 
e)	Geographic markets where coastal regions are affected by climate change. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.328 
41. Red ocean traps include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Overlooking the potential to sell to non-existing customers. 
b)	Not paying attention to new entrants and disruptive trends or technologies. 
c)	Choosing traditional market strategies and not thinking outside the box. 
d)	Not developing new or innovative capabilities, not being entrepreneurial. 
e)	Confusing technology innovation as market creating strategies.
f)	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	f) 	p.328-329 
42. In the context of strategy, escalation of commitment biases are: 
a)	Biases that make organization continue with an existing strategy that is failing. 
b)	Situations where organizations fail to implement strategies despite commitments. 
c)	Biases that prevent organizations from managing stakeholder expectations. 
d)	External conditions that force organizations to maintain their existing strategies. 
e)	Biases that cause analysis paralysis and the inability to take action on a timely basis.
f)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.329 
43. Escalation of commitment biases toward existing strategies include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Availability bias, anchoring bias, and herding bias. 
b)	Confidence bias, confirmation bias, and feeling of dread. 
c)	Sunk cost fallacy, loss aversion, and illusion of control. 
d)	Preference for completion, pluralistic ignorance, and personal identification. 
e)	Existing customers, existing strategies, and existing markets. 
f)	Existing knowledge, existing capabilities, and technology innovations. g) None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.329-330 
44. Identify two techniques that help mitigate the escalation of commitment bias: 
a)	Fostering a culture where healthy debate and dissent are encouraged. 
b)	Considering alternatives to existing strategies and experimenting with some of them. 
c)	Obtaining the views of internal auditors on existing strategies and alternatives 
d)	Developing a risk profile of strategies to see if they are consistent with risk appetite. 
e)	Establishing a committee for managing the implementation of strategies. 
f)	Making sure that those responsible for strategies are accountable for the results. 
g)	Applying scenario analysis to determine which strategies should be maintained. 	a) 
b) 	p.330 
45. In the context of strategy, the prospective hindsight method: 
a)	Involves analyzing failures and close calls, and documenting lessons learned. 
b)	Consists of analyzing possible failure modes to identify sources of risk. 
c)	Involves zooming out to the future, and zooming back to the present. 
d)	Defines a strategy and asks each management level to outline their contribution. 
e)	Assumes that a strategy has failed and requires participants to identify causes.
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.330-331 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
46. Short-termism is: 
a)	An expression that describe the approach to develop plans for the short term. 
b)	A planning approach that zooms out to the future and zooms in to the present in order to decide what to do over the next 12 to 18 months. 
c)	A focus on quarterly earnings by journalists and stock market analysts. 
d)	An excessive focus on short-term results to the detriment of long-term benefits.  
e)	An anchoring bias where managers focus on the most recent information available.
f)	 None of the above. 	d) 	p.331 
47. Solutions to counter the risk of short-termism include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Not developing annual plans in order to maintain a better focus on the long term. 
b)	Monitoring the progress of short term plans to ensure that progress is made. 
c)	Engaging investors to accept the need for maintaining a long-term perspective. 
d)	Having a clear long-term strategy and demonstrating progress along the way. 
e)	Controlling access to information that may be causing an anchoring bias. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.331 
48. Innovation barriers are: 
a)	Closed offices or cubicles that prevent employees from sharing information. 
b)	Internal conditions that impede the ability to innovate. 
c)	Psychological barriers that make employees risk averse to innovations. 
d)	Organizational behavior issues that cause employees to focus on the short term. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.333 
49. Innovation barriers include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Closed-minded cultures, rigid management systems, and lack of coordination. 
b)	Vertical hierarchies, mechanistic structures, and formal policies and procedures. 
c)	Lack of invention, limited creativity, and entrepreneurship failures. 
d)	Ignorance, incompetence, and laziness. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.333 
50. Closed-minded cultures can be mitigated by:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Making the expression of dissent a core organizational value. 
b)	Soliciting problems without pressuring employees for solutions. 
c)	Letting creative people work by themselves, away from the naysayers. 
d)	Creating innovation contests for managers and employees. 
e)	 All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.333 
51. An innovation strategy can be defined as:   
a)	A strategy that is unique and that competitors cannot copy and implement. 
b)	An approach that defines performance indicators and targets for innovation. 
c)	A plan and approach that foster creativity and entrepreneurship. 
d)	A strategy that involves incremental or radical changes to grow the organization. 
e)	A method for managing innovation projects on time and within budget. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.334 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
52. The direct effects of not having an innovation strategy include: 
a)	Not actively soliciting creative ideas. 
b)	Not effectively managing entrepreneurial proposals. 
c)	Not knowing where innovation is taking place, and where it may be lacking. 
d)	Spending a lot effort with limited results due to lack of a coordinated approach. 
e)	 All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.335 
53. Retrenchment strategies are: 
a)	Strategies that address profitability and competitiveness issues by reducing operational costs or divesting problem business lines or assets. 
b)	Risk transfer strategies that involve outsourcing or contracting out activities. 
c)	Strategies that address organizational decline by selling business lines or assets. 
d)	Plans and methods to find better ways to exit foreign markets no longer profitable. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.335 
54. The following are retrenchment strategies:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Contracting and outsourcing. 
b)	Leasing and franchising. 
c)	Downsizing and downscoping. 
d)	Transfer of activities and transfer of uncertainties. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.335 
 
 
True or False Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Strategy can be defined as the plans and approaches developed to achieve a higher level of performance and results. 	True 	p.296 
2. Strategy can be defined as the approach to analyze the external environment and make decisions regarding opportunities and threats. 	False 	p.296 
3. The purpose of strategy is to develop a competitive advantage or success formula that benefits the organization and its stakeholders. 	True 	p.296 
4. Strategic risks are associated with the soundness and implementation strategies. 	True 	p.296 
5. Strategic risks are the risks identified as part of external environment analysis. 	False 	p.296 
6. Strategy is only applicable to private sector organization trying to make a profit. 	False 	p.296 
7. Risks influence strategies, and strategies involve risks. 	True 	p.296 
8. Organizations create or destroy value mostly as a result of strategic risks. 	True 	p.297 
9. Organizations create or destroy value mostly as a result of financial risks. 	False 	p.297 
10. The most difficult aspect of context analysis is to develop a solid understanding of the macro environment of an organization, especially disruptive trends and technologies.  	True 	p.297 
11. Context analysis is a source of strategic risk. 	True 	p.297 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
12. In general, most organizations focus enough attention on emerging risks and disruptive trends and technologies. 	False 	p.299 
13. In general, most organizations focus do not enough attention on emerging risks and disruptive trends and technologies. 	True 	p.299 
14. A disruptor is an organization that exploits disruptive trends and technologies in order to gain a competitive advantage in an industry. 	True 	p.298 
15. A disruptor is an organization that acts criminally or without ethics. 	False 	p.298 
16. Disruptors can be suppliers, customers, competitors or new entrants to an industry. 	True 	p.298 
17. Disruptive trends are external forces that are evolving and have broad implications that are difficult to predict. 	True 	p.300 
18. Disruptive trends are methods, systems and devices that have transformative effects. 	False 	p.300 
19. Disruptive technologies are methods, systems and devices that have transformative effects. 	True 	p.300 
20. Disruptive technologies are external forces that are evolving and have broad implications that are difficult to predict. 	False 	p.300 
21. Examples of disruptive trends include: the Internet of things and work automation. 	True 	p.302 
22. Examples of disruptive technologies include: artificial intelligence and 3D printing. 	True 	p.303 
23. According to Robert B. Duncan, the static-dynamic dimension of the environment is a more important contributing factor to uncertainty than the simple-complex dimension. 	True 	p.300 
24. According to Robert B. Duncan, the simple-complex dimension of the environment is a more important contributing factor to uncertainty than the static-dynamic dimension. 	False 	p.300 
25. A competitive environment is the forces that create competition, which originate from industry stakeholders, and disruptive trends and technologies affecting the industry. 	True 	p.304 
26. A competitive environment is a market regulated for competition among participants. 	False 	p.304 
27. The five forces of industry competition model suggests that an industry is unattractive if one or more of the five forces of industry competition are excessively strong. 	True 	p.305 
28. The five forces of industry competition model suggests that an industry is unattractive if three ore more of the five forces of industry competition are excessively strong. 	False 	p.305 
29. The five forces of industry competition model suggests that rivalry among competitors, the power of customers, the power of suppliers, the threat of substitute products, and the threat of new entrants are the main forces affecting profitability. 	True 	p.304-305 
30. The five forces of industry competition model suggests that rivalry among competitors, the power of customers, the power of governments, the threat of differentiated products, and the threat of new entrants are the main forces affecting profitability. 	False 	p.304-305 
31. Strategic leadership is the ability to articulate meaningful goals, develop sound strategies for achieving them, and implement those strategies successfully. 	True 	p.305 
32. Strategic leadership is developing a mission, vision, values and smart objectives. 	False 	p.305 
33. Being perceptive and open-minded about strategy means that a strategic leader has knowledge of the field of strategy and differentiates strategy from business planning. 	False 	p.306 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
34. Being perceptive and open-minded about strategy means that a strategic leader encourages employees to challenge of assumptions and to analyze the implications of disruptive trends and technologies. 	True 	p.306 
35. Research by Marakon (a global consulting firm that specializes in strategy) indicates that organizations realize less than two thirds of the value of their anticipated strategies. 	True 	p.306 
36. Research by Marakon (a global consulting firm that specializes in strategy) indicates that organizations realize only seventy-five percent of the value of their strategies. 	False 	p.306 
37. The evolving nature of strategy means that strategies are effectively a blend of planned initiatives and reactive responses to changing environmental conditions. 	True 	p.306 
38. Many organizations adopt goals without clarifying strategies, and develop business plans with revenue forecasts and cost budgets without linkages to goals and strategies. 	True 	p.307 
39. Strategy selection includes maintaining, modifying or abandoning existing strategies, adopting new strategies, and eliminating other possibilities. 	True 	p.309 
40. Strategy selection excludes abandoning existing strategies and eliminating possibilities. 	False 	p.309 
41. One of the main factors to consider in strategy selection is relevance to vision and goals. 	True 	p.311 
42. One of the main factors to consider in strategy selection is competitor resources. 	False 	p.311 
43. Stakeholder needs are a source of risk when selecting strategies because stakeholders can withdraw their support if strategies are not responsive to their needs. 	True 	p.310 
44. Stakeholder needs are a source of risk when selecting strategies because stakeholders want products and services of superior value at a lower price than competitors. 	False 	p.310 
45. Management structure and skills are sources of risk during the growth phase of the organizational lifecycle. 	True 	p.312 
46. Management structure and skills are sources of risk during the maturity phase of the organizational lifecycle. 	False 	p.312 
47. Excessive bureaucracy and overhead costs are sources of risk during the maturity phase of the organizational lifecycle. 	True 	p.312 
48. Excessive bureaucracy and overhead costs are sources of risk during the renewal phase of the organizational lifecycle. 	False 	p.312 
49. Capabilities are a better foundation than resources for developing strategies because resources can be acquired but capabilities are more difficult for competitors to imitate. 	True 	p.311 
50. Resources are a better foundation than capabilities for developing strategies because capabilities are easy for competitors to develop, while resources are difficult to find. 	False 	p.311 
51. Focused market strategies have the same risks as low-cost or differentiated strategies, in addition to specific risks associated with targeting a narrow market segment. 	True 	p.315 
52. Research demonstrates that organizations that do not consciously adopt a low-cost, differentiation, or focused market strategy achieve below average profitability. 	True 	p.315 
53. A market leadership style not adapted to industry conditions can be a significant source of risk because it may be disconnected from environmental complexity and stability. 	True 	p.317 
54. A market leadership style not adapted to industry conditions can be a significant source of risk because it may not be relevant for the market strategy of the organization. 	False 	p.317 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
55. The prospector market leadership style is adapted to complex-dynamic environments. 	True 	p.317 
56. The prospector market leadership style is adapted to simple-static environments. 	False 	p.317 
57. A first mover market leadership approach involves assuming risks up front by investing in new strategies, trends or technologies. 	True 	p.317 
58. A first mover market leadership approach involves responding to competitive pressures using a low-cost or differentiation market strategy. 	False 	p.314 
59. Market leadership: first movers assume more risks but have a greater chance of reward. 	True 	p.317 
60. Market leadership: second movers assume more risks than first movers because they may be left behind and lose market share as a result of moving too late. 	False 	p.317 
61. Outsourcing is the transfer of activities done by an organization to a service provider that accepts to do them for the organization on a contractual basis. 	True 	p.318 
62. Outsourcing is an agreement between two or more organizations that decide to work collaboratively for pursuing an opportunity. 	False 	p.318 
63. Outsourcing risks include losing touch with activities critical to organizational success and having less control over the activities outsourced. 	True 	p.318 
64. Outsourcing risks include not having enough business to offer to a supplier, and having less flexibility to respond to changing environmental conditions. 	False 	p.318 
65. A strategic alliance is an agreement between two or more organizations that decide to work collaboratively for pursuing an opportunity. 	True 	p.318 
66. A strategic alliance is the transfer of activities done by an organization to a service provider that accepts to do them for the organization on a contractual basis. 	False 	p.318 
67. Strategic alliance risks include members being opportunistic and trying to take advantage of the alliance, and members not living up to expectations. 	True 	p.318-319 
68. Strategic alliance risks include losing touch with activities that are critical to organizational success and having less control over the activities of the alliance. 	False 	p.318-319 
69. Vertical integration is the amalgamation of external value chain activities within an organization. 	True 	p.319 
70. Vertical integration is the amalgamation of more than one market strategy within an organization. 	False 	p.319 
71. Vertical integration risks include challenges to remain current with new methods or technologies, and less flexibility to respond to changing environmental conditions. 	True 	p.319 
72. Vertical integration risks include disagreements on goals, strategies and objectives, and becoming dependent on service providers that participate in the vertical integration. 	False 	p.319 
73. Digital strategies are plans and approaches developed for pursuing opportunities related to computer technologies such as artificial intelligence and robotics. 	True 	p.320 
74. Digital strategies are conversions of information into data for computerized processing. 	False 	p.320 
75. Organizations are compelled to develop digital strategies because they become obsolete and an easier target for disruption if they do not. 	True 	p.320 
76. Organizations are compelled to develop digital strategies because they recognize the importance of remaining at the forefront of information technology trends. 	False 	p.320 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
77. Digital strategies need to be move visionary than other types of strategies because they consider alternative long term scenarios that may appear improbable. 	True 	p.320 
78. Digital strategies are similar to other types of strategies with respect to how they need to consider alternative long term scenarios that may appear improbable. 	False 	p.320 
79. Digital strategies have many implementation challenges related to human nature such as lack of leadership, inertia, resistance to change, and lack of alignment. 	True 	p.320 
80. Digital strategies have limited implementation risks other than complex technologies. 	False 	p.320 
81. Growth strategies include organic growth, diversification, foreign markets, and  acquisitions. 	True 	p.321-326 
82. Growth strategies include organic growth, differentiation, vertical integration, and foreign markets. 	False 	p.321-326 
83. Organic growth:  Economic cycles are a sources of risk for organic growth. 	True 	p.321-322 
84. Organic growth:  Managers proposing too many opportunities is a source of risk. 	False 	p.321-322 
85. Diversification:  Executives may have motives inconsistent with value creation, which is a common source of risk associated with diversification strategies for growth. 	True 	p.322 
86. Diversification:  Executives may not realize the growth prospects in other industries, which is a common source of risk associated with diversification strategies for growth. 	False 	p.322 
87. Entering foreign markets:  Not getting paid and having difficulty enforcing contracts and payment is a common source of risk applicable to foreign markets. 	True 	p.322 
88. Entering foreign markets:  Consumer not sufficiently valuing products customized to local preferences is a common source of risk applicable to foreign markets. 	False 	p.323-324 
89. Acquisitions:  Paying too much to entice owners or shareholders to sell is a common source of risk applicable to acquisitions as a growth strategy. 	True 	p.324-326 
90. Acquisitions:  Unfavorable financing conditions imposed by financial institutions is a common source of risk applicable to acquisitions as a growth strategy. 	False 	p.324-326 
91. Strategy execution is a major source of risk because organizations stagnate and decline when unable to implement their strategies. 	True 	p.326 
92. Strategy execution is a major source of risk because successful implementation requires having a good strategy in the first place. 	False 	p.326 
93. Strategy execution is challenging mostly because organizational alignment is often lacking or deficient, and implementation approaches are too rigid (not flexible enough). 	True 	p.326-327 
94. Strategy execution is challenging mostly because plans are often deficient, people are incompetent, responsibilities are unclear, and no one is accountable for results. 	False 	p.326-327 
95. Strategy execution requires dynamic implementation approach especially in complex and/or dynamic environments where course corrections may be needed along the way. 	True 	p.327 
96. It is often necessary to adopt creative solution or take advantage of unexpected opportunities along the way when implementing complex strategies. 	True 	p.327 
97. Studies consistently indicate that two-thirds to three-quarters of large organizations struggle to implement their strategies. 	True 	p.327 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
98. Studies consistently indicate that approximately one third of large organizations struggle to implement their strategies. 	False 	p.327 
99. In the field of strategy, red oceans are overcrowded markets with intense competition. 	True 	p.328 
100. In the field of strategy, red oceans are markets where political risks are significant. 	False 	p.328 
101. A red ocean trap is a condition where organizations fail to see new market opportunities, and continue to focus on exiting customers, strategies, markets and capabilities. 	True 	p.328 
102. Red ocean traps include overlooking the potential to sell to non-existing customers. 	True 	p.328 
103. Red ocean traps include not developing new or innovative capabilities, not being entrepreneurial, and not paying attention to disruptive trends and technologies. 	True 	p.328 
104. Red ocean traps include choosing a broad differentiation strategy when a low-cost strategy or a focused differentiation strategy would be better. 	False 	p.328 
105. Escalation of commitment biases make organizations continue with an existing strategy even when it becomes clear that it is failing and should be abandoned. 	True 	p.329 
106. Escalation of commitment biases mean that organizations are unable to manage stakeholder expectations and are forced to maintain their commitments. 	False 	p.329 
107. Escalation of commitment biases include sunk cost fallacy and loss aversion. 	True 	p.329 
108. Escalation of commitment biases include the availability bias and the anchoring bias. 	False 	p.329 
109. Escalation of commitment biases can be mitigated by fostering a culture where healthy debate and dissent are encouraged, and giving everyone the opportunity to speak. 	True 	p.330 
110. Escalation of commitment biases can be mitigated by assigning responsibilities for the implementation of strategies and making those responsible accountable for results. 	False 	p.330 
111. The prospective hindsight method involves assuming that a contemplated strategy has failed and asking participants in a work session to identify possible causes of failure. 	True 	p.330 
112. The prospective hindsight method involves analyzing successes, failures and close calls, and documenting and communicating lessons learned. 	False 	p.330 
113. Short-termism is an excessive focus on short-term results to the detriment of long-term benefits.  	True 	p.331 
114. Short-termism is an expression that describe the approach to develop plans for the short term, in order to achieve long term goals, strategies and objectives. 	False 	p.331 
115. Short-termism can be mitigated by engaging stakeholders to accept a long term perspective, having a clear long term strategy and regularly demonstrating progress. 	True 	p.331 
116. Short-termism can be mitigated by removing the anchoring bias that makes managers focus on the most recent information instead of considering all information sources. 	False 	p.331 
117. More than seventy percent of board members and senior executives report that pressures to deliver short-term results compromises the focus on long term strategies. 	True 	p.331 
118. Innovation barriers are internal conditions that impede the ability to innovate. 	True 	p.333 
119. Innovation barriers are psychological issues that make people risk averse to innovation. 	False 	p.333 
120. Innovation barriers include closed-minded cultures and rigid management systems. 	True 	p.333 
121. Innovation barriers include limited creativity and lack of entrepreneurship. 	False 	p.333 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
122. A closed-minded culture is a culture where employees are not open minded about new ideas and possibilities. Employees lack imagination and are always doubtful,  and are almost never willing to experiment and try new ways of doing things. 	True 	p.333 
123. A closed-minded culture is a culture where employees are not open to other cultures in favor of diversity, equity and inclusion in the workplace. 	False 	p.333 
124. An innovation strategy is a plan and approach for approving relevant and useful innovation projects, and making sure they are delivered on time and within budgets 	False 	p.335 
125. An innovation strategy is a plan and approach that foster creativity and entrepreneurship. It can also be described as a plan and approach for managing innovation. 	True 	p.334-335 
126. Retrenchment strategies address profitability and competitiveness issues by reducing operational costs or divesting problem business lines or assets. 	True 	p.335 
127. Common retrenchment strategies include contracting out activities, outsourcing activities, leasing assets (instead of owning assets), and franchising operations. 	False 	p.335 
128. Common retrenchment strategies include downsizing and downscoping. 	True 	p.335 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 8  
Organizational Alignment Risks 
 
 
Review Questions 
 
1. Importance of alignment 
 
a)	What is organizational alignment?   (p.366) 
Organizational alignment is the harmony among strategies, and among the capabilities, management systems and frameworks for achieving them. The management framework components that drive organizational alignment are governance, leadership, culture, structures, processes and coordination mechanisms. 
 
b)	Illustrate the concepts of enterprise alignment using a diagram.   (p.366) 
 
 
c)	Explain the fields of management that help create organizational alignment.   (p.366-367) 
•	Organizational behavior is the micro perspective of organizations because it focuses on the behavior of individuals. It examines leadership styles, employee motivations, and the cognitive and emotional differences among people within organizations.  
•	Organizational theory is the macro perspective of organizations because it considers how organizational units or groups interact with one another. It examines the socio-logy of organizational units, by contrast with organizational behavior which focuses on the psychology and behavior of individuals within organizations.  
•	Organizational design is the arrangement of organizational units, management systems and frameworks. The main components of organizational design are governance, leadership, culture, structures, processes and coordination mechanisms. There is organizational alignment when organizational design supports strategies and strategy implementation, and when organizational units operate in harmony. 
•	Organizational development is the planned evolution and renewal of organizational capabilities, management systems and frameworks to improve alignment in response to changing environmental conditions and evolving strategies. As such, organizational development focuses on change initiatives related to organizational design.  
 
 
 
 
d)	Outline the four scenarios of enterprise alignment using a diagram.   (p.367) 
	Strategic alignment 	Strategic alignment
	without organizational alignment	with organizational alignment
	Organizational strategies are consistent 	Organizational purpose, strategies and 
Aligned	with purpose, but organizational design	design are all consistent with one another. does not support the strategies. This 	This scenario provides the best chance scenario results in a failure to implement 	to implement the strategies successfully, the strategies and achieve the purpose.	and by extension achieve the purpose.
Purpose & Strategies
	Total misalignment	Organizational alignment 
	Organizational purpose, strategies and 	without strategic alignment
Misaligned	design are inconsistent with one another. 	Organizational strategies are inconsistent This scenario results in a failure to achieve 	with purpose, but organizational design the purpose, and a failure to implement 	supports the strategies. This scenario strategies irrespective of the purpose.	results in a failure to achieve the purpose.
	Misaligned	Strategies & 	Aligned
Organizational Design
 
 
2. Sources of risk causing misalignment 
 
a)	Briefly explain two significant sources of risk that cause misalignment.   (p.368) 
•	Unassigned responsibility - Often times, no individual or group is functionally responsible for overseeing organizational alignment. The chief executive may not have the necessary competencies and skills for assuming organizational alignment responsibilities. 
•	Separate focus - Senior executives tend to focus on strategy and organizational design separately. They may not achieve organizational alignment as a result. 
 
b)	Explain how these risks can be mitigated.   (p.368) 
•	Unassigned responsibility - Appoint a chief operating officer (COO) entirely focused on internal operations. If the COO has authority and the right competencies and skills, organizational alignment will be much easier to achieve. As a management function, COOs and their office staff can assume ownership for organizational alignment. 
•	Separate focus - Review organizational design every time new strategies are adopted, or whenever existing strategies are substantially altered. Senior executives should lead the review with the assistance of experts. Where appropriate, organizational development techniques can be used to help transition an organization to a new design. 
 
3. Consequences of misalignment 
 
a)	Briefly outline three consequences of misalignment.   (p.369) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Siloed functions - information not shared, groups not working collaboratively. 
•	Excessive bureaucracy - policies, procedures, and oversight to compensate for misalignment. 
•	Employee frustrations - goals not shared lack of cooperation and coordination across groups. 
•	Decision-making challenges - information not shared, organizational issues and conflicts. 
•	Organizational inertia - cannot agree on new strategies, inability to innovate. 
•	Intergroup conflicts - divergent goals and interests, lack of agreement on priorities, eternal debates and fighting for resources allocation, lack of cooperation, disputes, etc. 
•	Power struggles - use of illegitimate power to achieve personal or group objectives. 
•	Organizational politics - use of deceitful tactics to achieve personal or group objectives. 
 
 
b)	How prevalent is misalignment in organizations?   (p.370) 
Dysfunctions resulting from misalignment are very common and a major obstacle to organizational performance. They are self-reinforcing sources of risk, which means that they positively correlate and compound one another. A survey by Bain & Company,  a global management consulting firm, reveals that ninety-four percent of business leaders of very large organizations believe that “internal dysfunction – not lack of opportunity or unmatchable competitor capabilities – is the main barrier to continued profitable growth.” 
 
4. Organizational design considerations – External environment 
 
a)	Why should organizational design be adapted to the external environment?   (p.370) Organizations are an open system. Accordingly, they must adapt and interact with  their environment to survive. Most organizations operate in a complex and/or dynamic environment where many external forces are present, some of which have significant effects. Disruptive trends and technologies, combined with competitive pressures, force organizations to adopt new strategies and adjust their alignment. Very few organizations operate in a simplestatic environment compared to how things were in the twentieth century. Strategy and design must adapt to this reality. The contingency theory proposes that organizations should design their management frameworks to fit their external environment. A poor fit leads to failure. 
 
b)	Contrast organizational design differences between simple-dynamic versus complex-dynamic environments.   (p.371) 

Environment	Simple – Static	Complex – Dynamic
Emphasis
Culture
Structure
Decisions
Controls	•	Operational efficiency
•	Formal, disciplined
•	Vertical, hierarchical
•	Centralized, top down
•	Compliance to set rules	•	Innovation, adaptability
•	Collegial, collaborative
•	Horizontal, flexible
•	Decentralized, frontline
•	Adherence to values, principles

 
5. Organizational design considerations - Lifecycle 
 
a) What sort of organizational design changes does an organization typically go through as part of its birth, growth, maturity, renewal and decline phases?   (p.371-372) 
Birth 	Leaders are entrepreneurial and directly involved with all activities.  
The organization operates without formal structures and embraces teamwork. 
Growth 	Groups are formed into management functions that enable specialization. Committees, policies and procedures are created to foster alignment. 
Maturity 	More authority is typically delegated to frontline employees. Structures are redesigned on the basis of products or markets. Business units are created. 
Renewal 	Matrix structures help improve coordination. Cross-functional teams, task  forces and separate entities are created to facilitate or enable renewal efforts. 
Decline 	Organizations typically downsize or divest business lines that are not profitable. They need to become more focused, agile and nimble in order to survive. 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Organizational design considerations – Market strategies 
 
a) How is a differentiation strategy best supported by organizational design?   (p.373) Differentiation strategies are generally associated with horizontal and flexible structures that facilitate collaboration. Decision making is usually more decentralized, and policies and procedures are less formal, especially in areas where there is a need for experimentation,  or in areas where customer interactions take place. In this context, employees tend to have more empowerment to make decisions or take actions on the basis of judgment to achieve organizational objectives. Such management frameworks are focused on adaptability and collaboration, because there is a need for creativity and entrepreneurship. 
 
7. Organizational design considerations – Capabilities 
 
a) What are the four capabilities that need to be supported by organizational design?  (p.374-376) 
Agility 	• 	Ability to move quickly, take advantage of opportunities, respond to threats. 
	• 	Requires a bias for action, collaboration, responsiveness, quick decisions. 
	• 	Achieved by implementing a flat hierarchy and informal communications. 
Flexibility 	• 	Ability to be creative, experiment, innovate, and propose new solutions. 
	• 	Requires flexible working arrangements that allow discretion and judgment. 
	• 	Achieved with a collegial and collaborative working environment. 
Coordination 	• 	Ability to organize and integrate business units effectively. 
	• 	Requires thoughtful divisions and effective structures for integration. 
	• 	Achieved with a proper mix of coordination and integration mechanisms. 
Control  	• 	Ability to obtain assurance that expectations are met regarding performance, the safeguarding of assets, compliance, and relevant and timely reporting. 
	• 	Requires responsibility centers, allocated responsibilities and authorities, oversight mechanisms, reporting systems, and accountability for results. 
	• 	Achieved with internal control activities and management control frameworks. 
 
8. Strategy execution 
 
a)	What are the six most common challenges encountered for strategy execution?   (p.378) 
•	Poor understanding of strategic priorities 
•	Lack of alignment, coordination and support 
•	Complex and rigid plans 
•	Focus on short-term performance 
•	Micromanagement by senior executives 
•	Resistance to change 
 
b)	Briefly explain two of the six challenges.   (p.378-379) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Poor understanding of strategic priorities - too many priorities and/or conflicting messages; lack of understanding of how goals, strategies and priorities fit together. 
•	Lack of alignment, coordination and support - Failure to accept and align to common goals; failure to coordinate efforts across groups and/or to support other groups. 
•	Overly complex and rigid plans - Plans inflexible for adjustment to changing conditions; overly prescriptive plans that are a straitjacket and stifle innovation. 
•	Focus on short-term performance - Unwillingness to experiment due to excessive pressures; adoption of simplistic solutions that are less costly but sub-optimal in the long run. 
•	Micromanagement by senior executives - Lack of empowerment, excessive oversight, second guessing of middle managers, loss of interest by middle managers to make strategies work. 
•	Resistance to change - Employees resist change that is unsettling or not to their benefit; ineffective management of change / change management techniques. 
 
c)	What are the five structural components of the strategy execution framework?   (p.380-381) • Policies and procedures 
•	Structures 
•	Coordination mechanisms 
•	Information  
•	Performance 
 
d)	Briefly explain two of the five structural components.   (p.380-381) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Policies and procedures - Examine and revise to support behaviors and capabilities required for execution and alignment. Communicate and provide training. 
•	Structures - Review and revise based on new strategies. Ensure that roles, responsibilities and accountabilities are adapted for strategy implementation. Manage change to structures. 
•	Coordination mechanisms - Establish coordination mechanisms such as strategy implementation office, cross-functional teams, advisory committee.  
•	Information - Monitor external environment, identify changing conditions, ensure that information is communicated and shared, upgrade information systems. 
•	Performance - Management controls that support implementation, performance incentives, rewards and recognition, monitor implementation, adapt to changing conditions. 
 
9. Strategy execution - Approach 
 
a)	Explain why a dynamic approach for strategy execution is important.   (p.381) The timelines for strategy implementation can take several months to several years.  It is therefore essential to recognize that course corrections will be needed along the way. Senior executives must be willing to modify organizational strategies in response to changes in the competitive environment, or signs that strategies are not working well. 
 
b)	In what context is a dynamic approach particularly important and why?   (p.381) 
Being willing and able to make changes to strategies is especially important in complex and/or dynamic environments. Strategies are never cast in stone because they rest on market conditions that change continuously. (…) A dynamic approach to strategy implementation is required for complex and/or dynamic environments. As such, the implementation approach needs to match the environmental conditions that the strategies are responding to. 
 
10. Governance 
 
a)	What is governance?   (p.382) 
Governance refers to the authority that boards of directors (or equivalent) exercise on behalf of the owners, shareholders or other types of investors that they represent. Boards of directors exercise their authority by appointing the chief executive officer of the organization, directing the organization, and overseeing the conduct of its affairs. 
 
b)	Briefly explain two factors that contribute to ineffective governance.   (p.383-384) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Deficient board member qualifications – competencies and skills lacking (does not cover all organizational activities and risks). Cannot perform effective oversight when that it the case. 
•	Inadequate board member renewal – Board members that serve for too long are not up to date, or do not bring in fresh new ideas. Groupthink and lack of meaningful insights. 
•	Lack of independence from management – Board members biased in favor or management proposals. Some are in a conflict of interest. Weak oversight of managerial decisions. 
•	Chairperson and chief executive officer duality – One person for both roles weakens governance. Too much power in one position. Conflict of interest regarding oversight. 
•	Lack of quality information – Lack of quality information to support board decision and oversight. Information overload is also a problem.  
•	Excessive focus on compliance and reporting – Too much time spent on compliance and reporting obligations. Not enough time dedicated to strategies and strategic risks. 
 
c)	What is the role of the governance committee?   (p.384) 
A governance committee at the board level recommends governance principles and policies, the selection of board members, and the selection of the chief executive officer. 
 
11. Operational leadership 
 
a)	What is operational leadership?   (p.384) 
Operational leadership is the ability to design and put in place effective management frameworks, and to motivate and mobilize employees to perform, namely to realize strategic outcomes and achieve operational excellence. 
 
b)	What are the traits of weak versus strong operational leadership?   (p.385) 
 	Strong 	Weak 
Consultative 	Solicit ideas to implement strategies, and to improve operations. 	Decisions without consultations, little effort to find optimal solutions. 
Assertive 	Focus on results, create excitement  for change, allocate resources. 	Indecisive about alignment, limited initiative, unable to secure resources. 
Supportive 	Delegate and empower employees, create collaborative environment. 	Not trusting of employees, tendency to micromanage, no sharing of info. 
Diligent 	Monitor strategies and operations, identify issues, initiate corrections. 	Neglectful, waits for situations to deteriorate, blames others for failures. 
 
c)	What are the six leadership styles?   (p.386) 
• • 	Coercive 
Mobilizing 	• • 	Affiliative 
Democratic 	• • 	Pacesetting 
Coaching 
 
d)	Describe two leadership styles, and their suitability and drawbacks.   (p.386) Students may choose from the following: 
Style 	Description 	Suitability 	Drawback 
Coercive 	Give directions (orders). Demand compliance. 	Effective in times of crises and organizational decline. 	Employees may feel disrespected and resentful. 
Mobilizing 	Explain vision and goals. Give employees latitude. 	When need to create a sense of purpose, motivates employees. 	Limited direction given. 
Goals too difficult or easy. 
Affiliative 	Build a collaborative work environment and relationships. 	For team building, to improve morale, build trust and loyalty. 	May tolerate mediocrity, not discipline poor performers. 
Democratic 	Motivate through consensus. Give employees a voice. 	Useful to generate ideas, avoid bias, increase commitment. 	Employees need to be well informed and competent. 
Pacesetting 	Set high expectations. 
Put pressure to achieve results. 	Works well if employees are self-motivated and competent. 	Employee stress and burnout. Some employees fell helpless. 
Coaching 	Develop employees. 
Delegate and give feed-back. 	Employees want to improve, assume more responsibilities. 	Not useful if employees have little motivation to move up. 
12. Organizational culture 
 
a)	Explain why organizational culture is important for organizational alignment.   (p.387) Culture is very important because it guides employee thoughts and behaviors, including how they react to changing environmental conditions, new strategies and business models, and changes to management systems and frameworks. A healthy culture serves as a unifying force that supports strategies and business models. Alternatively, a dysfunctional culture can undermine strategies and business models, and create significant risks.   
 
b)	What are the six types of unhealthy cultures that affect organizational alignment?   (p.388-389) 
•	Weak culture 
•	Change-resistant culture 
•	Politicized culture 
•	Inward-looking culture 
•	Unethical culture 
 
c)	Describe two of the six types of unhealthy cultures and how to address them.   (p.388-389) Students may choose from the following: 
Unhealth cultures 	Description 	Solution 
Weak culture 	Lack of shared values, no influence on behaviors, lack of motivation and commitment, engagement. 	Senior executive exemplify values. 
Demonstrate commitment to values. 
Reward and sanction behaviors. 
Change-resistant culture 	Risk aversion, bias to preserve the status quo, change agents are trouble-makers, no enthusiasm for new strategies. 	Define the imperative for change. 
Communicate the need for change. 
Build trust, provide training, counseling. 
Politicized culture 	Achieve outcomes only for personal gain. Support for change only if beneficial to self. Deceitful tactics. 	Change organizational leadership. 
Appoint affiliative CEO. 
Discipline or dismiss the bad actors. 
Inward-looking culture 	Employees are closed minded, think they 
have all the answers, not open to stakeholder feed-back. Arrogance. 	May require a wake-up call event. Adopt of balanced scorecard and make employees accountable for results. 
Unethical culture 	Little regard for values and ethics. The end justifies the means to achieve performance targets and get rewards. 	Reinforce values and ethics through codes of conduct, training, discipline. 
Dismiss bad actors. Whistleblowing. 
 
13. Organizational structures 
 
a)	What is an organizational structure?   (p.389-390) 
An organizational structure is the arrangement of roles, responsibilities and authorities within an organization. It is reflected by an organizational chart that depicts the various groups, positions and reporting relationships within an organization. The chart may also indicate linkages across organizations affiliated through ownership or agreements. (…) Organizational structures may also include various coordination mechanisms that facilitate collaboration and integration across organizational units. For example, the organizational structure may include management committees, and task forces involved with change initiatives. 
 
b)	What symptoms indicate a misalignment of structure with organizational context?   (p.390) When an organizational structure is not adapted to organizational context and needs, one or more of the following symptoms of misalignment or dysfunction usually appear: 
•	Innovation is absent 
•	Decision-making is slow or lacking in quality • Goals are not met and performance declines 
•	Organizational conflict is rampant. 
14. Organizational structures – Vertical and horizontal structures 
 
a)	Explain the difference between vertical and horizontal structures.   (p.391-392) 
Vertical structure 	Horizontal structure 
•	Taller hierarchy, more management levels 
•	More limited number of direct reports • Formal reporting relationships 
•	Vertical communications are expected 
•	Limited delegation and empowerment 
•	Close supervision of employees 	•	Flatter hierarchy, fewer management levels 
•	Greater number of subordinates 
•	Relaxed and shared reporting relationships 
•	Horizontal communications are encouraged 
•	Greater delegation and empowerment 
•	Coaching and management by objectives 
 
b)	What are the advantages of each of these structures?   (p.391-392) 
Vertical structure 	Horizontal structure 
•	Supports mechanistic management 
•	Adapted for simple-static environments 
•	Suitable for low-cost market strategies 
•	Supports centralization and authority 
•	Emphasizes compliance to rules 
•	Supports control, operational efficiency 
•	Adapted for task specialization 	•	Supports organic management 
•	Adapted for complex-dynamic environments 
•	Suitable for differentiation market strategies 
•	Supports decentralization and delegation 
•	Facilitates collaboration and teamwork 
•	Supports innovation, adaptability, flexibility 
•	Adapted for shared tasks and learning 
 
15. Organizational structures – Organizational unit structures 
 
a)	What is an organizational unit structure?   (p.393) 
An organizational unit structure is a structure that indicates one or more employee groups. 
 
b)	What are the five types of organizational unit structures?   (p.393) 
•	Simple structure – single group 
•	Functional structure – functional groups 
•	Process-team structure – process groups 
•	Divisional structure – business unit groups 
•	Matrix structure – cross-group linkages 
 
c)	Explain two risks associated with each type of organizational unit structure.   (p.394-399) Students may choose from the following: 
Structure 	Risks 
Simple 	•	General manager burnout - too many employees to supervise 
•	Growing pains - not adequate if the organizations is growing 
•	Employee concerns - limited chances of advancement 
Functional 	•	Organizational siloes - self-serving policies, procedures, systems 
•	Limited collaboration - limited sharing of information across functions 
•	Lack of innovation - siloes and limited collaboration impede innovation 
Process-team 	•	Implementation challenges - non traditional, difficult to design 
Functional competencies and skills development - lack of opportunities 
•	Managerial dismay - managers not at ease managing process teams 
Structure 	Risks 
Divisional 	•	Collaboration and coordination challenges - autonomous divisions 
•	Related diversification inefficiencies - there may be duplication 
•	Corporate center bureaucracy - control systems can be a burden 
•	Customer frustrations - each division contacts the same customers 
Matrix 	•	Employee frustrations - reporting to more than one manager 
•	Conflicting authorities - division and functional leader conflicts 
•	Unproductive meetings - too many meetings to make the matrix work 
•	Higher overhead costs - added management layer across divisions 
•	Lower employee engagement - too many demands, complexities 
 
16. Organizational structures – Network structure 
 
a)	What is a network structure?   (p.399) 
A network structure is a collection of independent organizations that work collaboratively on the basis of outsourcing or strategic alliance agreements. It is typically created by an organization that obtains outsourced services, or that leads members of a strategic alliance.  
 
b)	Outline two risks associated with network structures.   (p.400) 
Structure 	Risks 
Network 	•	Structure complexity - confusing relationships, difficult to manage 
•	Management information systems failures - reliance on IT systems 
•	Contractual agreement deficiencies - no direct authority, disputes 
 
17. Coordination mechanisms 
 
a)	What are coordination mechanisms?   (p.401) 
Coordination mechanisms are management practices, processes, methods and techniques that facilitate collaboration and integration across organizational units. Some coordination mechanisms are roles assigned to employees or groups, such as leaders, committees and teams. Other mechanisms are shared elements such as goals, culture, policies, plans and information systems. 
 
b)	Briefly describe one role and one element that support coordination.   (p.401-403) Students may choose from the following roles: 
•	Leaders - coordination leadership roles (e.g. process owner, relationship manager, etc.) 
•	Committees - coordination of activities (e.g. executive, management, advisory, steering) • Teams - diverse competencies and skills (e.g. process team, project team, task force, etc.) Students may choose from the following elements: 
•	Goals - achieve a common purpose (e.g. mission, vision, goals, strategies, objectives) 
•	Culture - operate within acceptable norms (e.g. collegial, collaborative culture) 
•	Plans - translate goals into action (e.g. strategic plans, business plans, budgets) 
•	Policies - state intentions and expectations, influence behavior, coordination mechanisms 
•	Authorities - decision making rights (e.g. spending, contracting, investing, hiring) 
•	Accountabilities - answerable to decisions and actions consistent with values, policies, etc. 
•	Incentives - define performance targets, mobilize, reward individual and group performance  
•	Information systems - everyone works with the same reliable, relevant, timely information 
•	Internal control systems - assurance that activities are carried out as intended 
•	Learning systems - education, training, development - including what others are doing 
 
 
18. Renewal and redesign 
 
a)	What is organizational redesign?   (p.403) 
Organizational redesign is the rearrangement of organizational units, management systems, frameworks and processes to enable organizational renewal. It involves updating the design of an organization to improve alignment with updated goals, strategies or business models. 
 
b)	Describe reorganization and transformation.   (p.403) 
•	Reorganization is making changes to organizational units, either by changing the organizational unit structure (restructuring), or changing the composition of business units (reconfiguration) within the same organizational unit structure. It may also include changes to other design components (besides structure), such as governance, leadership, culture, etc.  A reorganization is a revision of organizational alignment. 
•	Transformation is adopting new goals, strategies or business models, and making organizational design changes where needed, including changes to components such as governance, leadership, culture, structure, etc. A transformation is a revision of enterprise alignment. 
 
c)	What are the four sources of risk frequently encountered in redesign?   (p.404-405) 
•	Faulty diagnostic 
•	Insufficient planning 
•	Weak leadership 
•	Resistance to change 
 
d)	Describe one of these four sources of risk.   (p.404-405) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Faulty diagnostic – not having a clear understanding of alignment issues and causes, resulting in misguided and ineffective redesign solutions. 
•	Insufficient planning – not identifying and analyzing the implication of the redesign changes, resulting in unintended consequences on employees, culture, processes, etc. 
•	Weak leadership – lack of senior executive involvement in communicating the purpose and rational of the redesign, resulting in employee confusion and apprehension. 
•	Resistance to change – lack of employee communications and consultations to address issues and concerns; perceived inadequate or unfair approaches to downsizing and downscoping. 
 
 
Other Short Answer Questions 
 
1.	Why is organizational alignment sometimes an afterthought and a major challenge?   (p.366) Many senior executives and managers have a limited understanding of these fields and how they differ from organizational behavior, which typically receives more attention at the undergraduate level of management education programs. For this reason, organizational alignment is sometimes an afterthought and often a major challenge because important fields of management [organizational theory, organizational design and organizational development are not very well understood. 
 
2.	Describe the context and organizational design adjustments that need to take place during the growth and maturity phases of the organizational lifecycle in order to maintain alignment.  (p.372) 
•	Growth stage - Organizations can no longer operate informally because of their size. Groups are formed into management functions that enable specialization. Organizations typically adopt a functional structure at this stage, supplemented with management committees to facilitate collaboration and make decisions. Policies and procedure are also developed to improve alignment. 
•	Maturity stage - Organizations become excessively bureaucratic and need to delegate authority to the frontline. They typically move to a business unit structure based on products, customer groups, or geographic segments. They apply control systems at the corporate level to manage the performance of business units. Need to maintain an appropriate decentralization and delegation. 
3.	What design risks are encountered by large organizations as they continue to grow?   (p.372) 
How can these risks be mitigated?   (p.372) 
•	Risks - Irrespective of their environment, organizations have a tendency to become more formal, vertical and mechanistic as they grow and mature. This tendency creates a major risk for organizations that operate in complex-dynamic environments, because they gradually lose their flexibility and ability to innovate, adapt and respond to changing environmental conditions.  
•	Mitigation - An effective response to mitigate this risk is to decentralize decision-making to business units, and give more empowerment to frontline employees. For instance, employees dealing with customers may be authorized to make decisions more freely in response to suggestions or complaints, than they otherwise would if they had limited empowerment. In turn, the employees can propose innovative solutions to management. 
 
4.	How is a low-cost strategy best supported by organizational design?   (p.373) 
A low-cost strategy rests on operational efficiency. Low-cost strategies are generally associated with formal policies and procedures, vertical structures and hierarchy, centralized decision making, and tight controls based on rules. In this context, employees perform routine tasks under close supervision, and typically have limited empowerment to make decisions or take actions on their own. Such management frameworks are focused on driving out maximum operational efficiency when there is limited need to innovate and adapt to changing conditions. 
 
5.	Outline three elements that are of critical importance for internal control systems.   (p.376) 
•	Responsibility centers - operate consistently with goals, support strategy implementation 
•	Responsibilities - roles, responsibilities, authorities, accountabilities defined and communicated 
•	Resources - allocation of resources [controlled] consistent with goals, strategies, priorities 
•	Incentives - motivate employees to achieve goals and support organizational alignment 
•	Oversight and reporting - monitor performance, strategy implementation and alignment 
•	Accountability - performance rewards, learning from experience, including alignment issues 
 
6.	What are the advantages and trade-offs of centralization and decentralization in the context of organizational design?   (p.377) 
An important control challenge of organizational design is to maintain an appropriate balance between centralization and decentralization. (…) If there is too much centralization, senior executives are excessively drawn into operations, which slows decision making and affects the ability to manage organizations strategically. If there is too much decentralization, senior executives are detached from operations, and organizational units may not necessarily act in the best interest of thee organization. 
CENTRALIZATION	DECENTRALIZATION
 
Advantages:	Advantages:
•	Senior executives have more control over 	• Managers in organizational units can the directions taken by organizational units.	respond quickly to changing conditions.
•	There is more assurance that organizational • There is more ability for the organization goals are not superseded by other goals.	to be agile, creative and innovative.
Downside:	Downside:
•	Senior executives may become overly 	• Organizational units may become siloed, immersed in operational activities, and 	and not integrate their activities in a manner not manage the organization strategically.	that optimizes risk-reward relationships.
 
7.	What are the five foundation components of the strategy execution framework?   (p.380) 
•	Leadership 
•	Culture 
•	Capabilities 
•	Resources 
•	Communication 
8.	Briefly explain two of the five structural components of the strategy execution framework. (p.380) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Leadership - exercise leadership for alignment, provide clear directions, communicate the need for change, reinforce the need to work collaboratively, empower managers, make course corrections. 
•	Culture - define the culture needed, assess if culture is adapted, develop a plan and roadmap, communicate changes needed, appoint individuals who exemplify, discipline those who don’t. 
•	Capabilities - analyze external environment, identify capabilities needed, assess existing capabilities, develop a plan and roadmap, train managers and staff on capabilities required. 
•	Resources - define priorities, determine resources needed, assign priorities and resources, assemble teams, obtain updates on execution progress, revise resource allocation as needed. 
•	Communication - communicate to stakeholders, explain the changes needed, engage in a dialogue with managers and staff on capabilities required, communicate implementation activities. 
 
9.	Describe the dynamic approach to strategy execution for each of the following points:  (p.382) 1)  Translate the strategy 
2)	Adapt the strategy 
3)	Sustain the strategy 
1)	Translate the strategy - Actionable objectives that provide direction but are not overly prescriptive (clarity on what to do, flexibility on how to do it). 
2)	Adapt the strategy - Course corrections where appropriate, based on changing conditions. 
Mechanisms such as strategy review meetings to examine progress and make revisions. 
3)	Sustain the strategy - Develop competencies and skills. Provide learning and training opportunities. Overcome resistance by creating enthusiasm and a supportive environment  
 
10.	Explain why the best operational leaders are skilled a several leadership styles.   (p.387) The best operational leaders are skilled at several leadership styles and switch between them as circumstances dictate.  As the research from Hay/McBer indicates, “leaders with the best results do not rely on only one leadership style; they use most of them in a given week – seamlessly and in different measure – depending on the business situation.” The approach is analogous to a golfer using various clubs at different times [through the same golf course]. 
 
11.	What is the first step that needs to be taken in order to change organizational culture?  (p.388) It is not possible to effectively influence or change an organizational culture unless it is well understood in the first place. Once a culture has been analyzed and diagnosed, its shortcomings or weaknesses are evident, and they can be addressed using organizational development and change techniques. Knowing the issues helps identify causes. Once the causes of the issues are identified, it is possible to develop effective solutions. 
 
12.	What defines a well-designed organizational structure?   (p.390) 
A well-designed structure exists when organizational units are aligned, operate effectively together, and support strategies and their implementation. 
 
13.	Explain why organizations have a tendency to move away from traditional mechanistic management systems and vertical structures.   (p.393) 
•	Very few organizations operate in a simple-static environment. 
•	Not adapting to complex-dynamic environments causes organizational failure. 
•	Changing employee attitudes and tight labor markets - less likely to lose employees. 
•	Higher level of satisfaction among young adults if organic management system. 
 
 
 
 
 
14.	What are the advantages and risks of functional structures?   (p.394-395) 
Advantages 	• 	Task specialization - within functions 
	• 	Economies of scale - functional expertise concentrated 
	• 	Simplicity - structure is easy to understand 
Risks 	• 	Organizational siloes - self-serving policies, procedures, systems 
	• 	Limited collaboration - limited sharing of information across functions 
	• 	Lack of innovation - siloes and limited collaboration impede innovation 
 
15.	What are the advantages and risks of divisional structures?   (p.396-397) 
Advantages 	• 	Alignment with strategies - products, customers, markets, etc. 
	• 	Unbundling of size and complexity - smaller, focused divisions 
	• 	Agility and flexibility - division operate autonomously 
	• 	Performance management - divisions are profit or investment centers 
Risks 	• 	Collaboration and coordination challenges - autonomous divisions 
	• 	Related diversification inefficiencies - there may be duplication 
	• 	Corporate center bureaucracy - control systems can be a burden 
	• 	Customer frustrations - each division contacts the same customers 
 
16.	What are the advantages and risks of matrix structures?   (p.396-397) 
Advantages 	• 	Teamwork and collaboration - cross functional integration 
	• 	Supports knowledge sharing and innovation - integration roles 
	• 	Responsive to changing environmental conditions - focused divisions 
	• 	Facilitates performance management - divisions, responsibility centers 
Risks 	• 	Employee frustrations - reporting to more than one manager 
	• 	Conflicting authorities - division and functional leader conflicts 
	• 	Unproductive meetings - too many meetings to make the matrix work 
	• 	Higher overhead costs - added management layer across divisions 
	• 	Lower employee engagement - too many demands, complexities 
 
17.	What are the advantages and risks of network structures?   (p.399-400) 
Advantages 	• 	Support for business model strategies - outsourcing, strategic alliances 
	• 	Agility and flexibility - modular structure, contracts can be terminated 
	• 	Cost-effective solutions - network members specialize at what they do 
Risks 	• 	Structure complexity - confusing relationships, difficult to manage 
	• 	Management information systems failures - reliance on IT systems 
	• 	Contractual agreement deficiencies - no direct authority, disputes 
 
18.	Describe goals as a coordination mechanism.   (p.401) 
Organizational goals motivate employees to achieve a common purpose. Alignment is strong when organizational units work collaboratively to achieve the same goals, or goals that are consistent. 
Broadly speaking, goals include: 
•	Mission - a statement of the mandate or raison d'être of an organization 
•	Vision - a general statement of what an organization wants to achieve 
•	Goals - broad, desirable results or outcomes that support the vision 
•	Strategies - plans and approaches to realize goals, improve performance 
•	Objectives - specific, measurable, assigned, relevant and time bound actions  (smart objectives) that support the achievement of goals and strategies 
 
19.	Describe incentives as a coordination mechanism.   (p.402) 
Incentives that reward performance motivate employees. If the incentives are thoughtfully designed, they can substantially increase collaboration and coordination across organizational units. The balanced scorecard is a form of coordination mechanism because of the focus and balance that it creates. Performance indicators can measure the achievement of goals and strategies, and serve to reward employees. Employees work collaboratively when they are rewarded on the same basis. 
 
20.	Describe learning systems as a coordination mechanism.   (p.403) 
Learning systems include formal education, professional development, and in-house training programs and learning activities developed by organizations for their employees. Learning systems regularize employee behavior, meaning that they make employees behave in predictable ways. Learning systems are a coordination mechanism when they provide employees with knowledge and skills that facilitate collaboration and integration. Employees collaborate much better when they understand what others do and what is expected of them. 
 
21.	Explain the role of effective leadership in facilitating organizational redesign. (p.405) The chief executive officer and senior executive team need to be actively engaged in the organizational redesign. They need to extensively communicate its purpose and rationale. There must be no doubt that the redesign is critical, that every manager is on board, and that every effort is being made to achieve a successful outcome. Senior executives must be visible in leading the change efforts. For instance, they should hold employee meetings and celebrate every milestone, such as when the initiative is launched, when a new structure is implemented, etc. 
 
22.	Explain how to overcome resistance to change to facilitate organizational redesign. (p.405) Organizational redesign has direct effects on employees. Employees naturally resist changes that are not to their benefit. The best way to overcome resistance is to give employees a voice and develop solutions that address their concerns. Organizational development techniques such as employee consultations, dialogue, negotiation, education, training, counselling and job transition help overcome resistance. When there is downsizing, workforce reduction techniques such as attrition, retirement incentives, buyout packages and outplacement services should be used to make things easier. It is critical to treat departing employees fairly. Otherwise, the employees that remain will not be engaged, and the organization will experience challenges attracting and retaining employees. 
 
 
Multiple Choice Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Organizational alignment is: 
a)	The harmony among strategies, capabilities, management systems and frameworks. 
b)	The application of organizational theory to design organizations. 
c)	The planned evolution and renewal of organizational capabilities for alignment. 
d)	The fit between organizational purpose and the strategies for realizing the purpose. 
e)	The overall alignment between purpose, strategy and management frameworks. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 	p.366 
2. Organizational theory: 
a)	Focuses on the behavior of individuals within organizations. 
b)	Considers how organizational units or groups interact with one another. 
c)	Looks at organizational arrangements, management systems and frameworks. 
d)	Concerns the planned evolution and renewal of organizational capabilities, management systems and framework to improve organizational alignment. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.366 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
3. Organizational design: 
a)	Focuses on the behavior of individuals within organizations. 
b)	Considers how organizational units or groups interact with one another. 
c)	Looks at organizational arrangements, management systems and frameworks. 
d)	Concerns the planned evolution and renewal of organizational capabilities, management systems and framework to improve organizational alignment. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.366 
4. Organizational development: 
a)	Focuses on the behavior of individuals within organizations. 
b)	Considers how organizational units or groups interact with one another. 
c)	Looks at organizational arrangements, management systems and frameworks. 
d)	Concerns the planned evolution and renewal of organizational capabilities, management systems and framework to improve organizational alignment. e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.367 
5. Organizational alignment is often an afterthought and a major challenge because: 
a)	Many senior executives and managers do not consider the implication of strategies to ensure that the organization achieves strategic alignment. 
b)	Many senior executives and managers have limited understanding of organizational theory, organizational design, and organizational development. 
c)	Organizational purpose and strategies are not clear and not properly implemented. 
d)	Most senior executives rely on inexperienced managers to design organizations. 
e)	Middle managers do not report misalignment issues to senior management. f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.366 
6. Identify two significant sources of risk that cause misalignment: 
a)	Unclear or unassigned responsibilities for organizational alignment. 
b)	Senior executives tend to focus on strategy and organizational design separately. 
c)	Senior executives have a limited understanding of organizational behavior. 
d)	The organization experiences intergroup conflicts and power struggles. 
e)	Employee frustrations and decision-making challenges are encountered. f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.368 
7. The negative consequences of misalignment include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Short-termism, innovation barriers and rigid management systems. 
b)	Siloed functions, excessive bureaucracy and employee frustrations. 
c)	Weak operational leadership, unhealthy cultures, ineffective strategies. 
d)	Intergroup conflicts, power struggles and organizational politics. 
e)	Unclear policies and procedures, and redundant processes and systems,  f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	b) 
d) 	p.369 
8. According to a survey by Bain & Company, the percentage of business leaders who believe that internal dysfunction is the main barrier to profitable growth is: a) Twelve percent. 
b)	Twenty five percent. 
c)	Forty-two percent 
d)	Seventy-eight percent. 
e)	Ninety-four percent. 	e) 	p.370 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
9. Organizational design should be adapted to the external environment because: 
a)	Organizations are an open system that needs to adapt to survive. 
b)	Simple-static environments no longer exist in the twenty-first century. 
c)	The contingency theory states that organization design must be flexible. 
d)	Organizational design should not be driven by internal considerations. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.370 
10. A mechanistic management system is: 
a)	A production system for automated manufacturing. 
b)	A supply chain system that is designed to operate autonomously. 
c)	A formal, vertical, hierarchical, and centralized management approach. 
d)	A collegial, horizontal, flexible, and decentralized management approach. 
e)	An information technology system used for making automated decisions. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.371 
11. An organic management system is: 
a)	A production system for automated manufacturing. 
b)	A supply chain system that is designed to operate autonomously. 
c)	A formal, vertical, hierarchical, and centralized management approach. 
d)	A collegial, horizontal, flexible, and decentralized management approach. 
e)	An information technology system used for making automated decisions. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.371 
12. Which of these design attributes are adapted to complex-dynamic environments: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Culture - collegial, collaborative 
b)	Structure - vertical, hierarchical 
c)	Decision-making - decentralized, frontline 
d)	Controls - compliance to set rules 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.371 
13. Which of these design attributes are adapted to simple-static environments: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Culture - formal, disciplined 
b)	Structure - horizontal, flexible 
c)	Decision-making - decentralized, frontline 
d)	Controls - compliance to set rules 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 
d) 	p.371 
14. Design adjustments required during the growth phase of the organizational lifecycle include the following:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Transition from a simple structure to a functional structure. 
b)	Creation of management committees to facilitate collaboration. 
c)	Policies and procedures streamlined to reduce bureaucracy. 
d)	Delegation of authorities to the frontline for better focus on customers. 
e)	Cross-functional teams and task forces to improve collaboration. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.372 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
15. Design adjustments required during the maturity phase of the organizational lifecycle include the following:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Creation of management committees to facilitate collaboration. 
b)	Development of policies and procedures to improve coordination. 
c)	Transition from a functional structure to a business unit structure. 
d)	Control systems at the corporate level to manage business units. 
e)	Cross-functional teams and task forces to improve collaboration. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.372 
16. Design risks encountered by organizations as they continue to grow and mature include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Tendency to become more formal, vertical and mechanistic. 
b)	Excessive bureaucracy and overhead costs. 
c)	Complexity of operations and lack of integration. 
d)	Loss of flexibility and ability to innovate, adapt and respond to changing conditions. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.372 
17. A low-cost strategy is best supported by these organizational design features: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Formal policies and procedures, vertical structures and hierarchy, centralized decision making, and tight controls based on rules. 
b)	Horizontal and flexible structures that facilitate collaboration, decentralized decision-making and policies and procedures are less formal. 
c)	A business unit structure or matrix structure that promotes experimentation. 
d)	An organic style of management that facilitates employee supervision and control. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.373 
18. A differentiation strategy is best supported by these organizational design features: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Formal policies and procedures, vertical structures and hierarchy, centralized decision making, and tight controls based on rules. 
b)	Horizontal and flexible structures that facilitate collaboration, decentralized decision-making and policies and procedures are less formal. 
c)	A simple structure or functional structure aligned with products and services. 
d)	A mechanistic style of management that facilitates collegiality and collaboration. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.373 
19. The four capabilities that need to be supported by organizational design are: 
a)	Agility, flexibility, decentralization and oversight 
b)	Flexibility, coordination, governance and control 
c)	Agility, flexibility, coordination and control 
d)	Sustainability, environmental, social, and governance 
e)	Performance, safeguarding of assets, empowerment and accountability f) 	None of the above 	c) 	p.374-376 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
20. The following elements are critical to control systems:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Responsibility centers that operate consistently with organizational goals. 
b)	Roles, responsibilities, authorities, accountabilities defined and communicated. 
c)	Resources allocation of resources consistent with goals, strategies and priorities. 
d)	Incentives that motivate employees to achieve goals and support alignment. 
e)	Oversight and reporting to monitor and manage performance. 
f)	Accountability for results, performance rewards and learning from experience. g) All of the above. 
h) None of the above. 	g) 	p.376 
21. In the context of organizational design, decentralization offers the following advantages:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Senior executives have more control on directions taken by organizational units. 
b)	There is more assurance that organizational goals are not superseded by other goals. 
c)	Managers in organizational units can respond more quickly to changing conditions. 
d)	There is more ability for the organization to be agile, creative and innovative. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.377 
22. In the context of organizational design, decentralization has the following  downsides:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Senior executives may become overly immersed in operational activities, and  not manage the organization strategically. 
b)	Organizational units may become siloed, and not integrate their activities in a manner that optimizes risk-reward relationships. 
c)	Senior executives may resist to change if their performance is not rewarded. 
d)	Organizational units may develop overly complex and rigid plans. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.377 
23. Common challenges for strategy execution include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Poor understanding of strategic priorities. 
b)	Lack of alignment, coordination and support. 
c)	Complex and rigid plans. 
d)	Focus on short-term performance. 
e)	Micromanagement by senior executives. 
f)	Resistance to change. 
g)	All of the above. 
h)	None of the above. 	g) 	p.378-379 
24. The following are foundational components of the strategy execution framework:  
(select all that apply) 
a)	Policies, structures, coordination mechanisms, information, performance. 
b)	Governance, agility, flexibility, coordination, control. 
c)	Leadership, culture, capabilities, resources, communications. 
d)	Organizational lifecycle, organization size, market strategies, resources, capabilities. 
e)	Operational emphasis, culture, structure, decisions, controls.  
f)	None of the above 	c) 	p.380 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
25. The following are structural components of the strategy execution framework:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Governance, agility, flexibility, coordination, control. 
b)	Policies, structures, coordination mechanisms, information, performance. 
c)	Leadership, culture, capabilities, resources, communications. 
d)	Organizational lifecycle, organization size, market strategies, resources, capabilities. 
e)	Operational emphasis, culture, structure, decisions, controls.  
f)	None of the above 	b) 	p.380-381 
26. A dynamic approach for strategy execution is important because: 
a)	Strategy implementation can take several months to several years. 
b)	Senior executives may not be willing to adopt new strategies proactively. 
c)	The traditional framework for strategy implementation is obsolete. 
d)	Management controls require that a dynamic approach should be used. 
e)	Managers may not understand why strategies should be implemented. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 	p.381 
27. A dynamic approach for strategy execution is particularly important: 
a)	In simple and/or static environments. 
b)	In complex and/or dynamic environments. 
c)	In environments where market strategies are ineffective. 
d)	In foreign markets where risks are unknown or unpredictable. 
e)	In domestic markets where labor markets are tight. 
f)	When inflation is high and there is potential for a recession. 
g)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.381 
28. In a dynamic approach to strategy execution, translating the strategy means: 
a)	Translating plans in priories in multiple languages for employees to understand. 
b)	Adapting the strategy to existing customers, markets, products and services. 
c)	Developing actionable objectives that give direction, but are not too prescriptive. 
d)	Communicating the strategy using different formats, including social media. 
e)	Developing a Gantt chart and a pert chart to outline the activities and critical path. 
f)	Defining key performance indicators and developing a balanced scorecard. g) None of the above. 	c) 	p.382 
29. In a dynamic approach to strategy execution, adapting the strategy means: 
a)	Applying course corrections along the way in response to changing conditions. 
b)	Adapting to stakeholder expectations, especially customers and investors. 
c)	Making changes to market strategies in order to have focused differentiation. 
d)	Revising strategies in order to avoid or circumvent employee resistance to change. 
e)	Making changes in order to have better alignment with the mission and vision. 
f)	Reviewing strategies to meet implementation timelines and budgets. g) None of the above. 	a) 	p.382 
30. In a dynamic approach to strategy execution, sustaining the strategy means: 
a)	Implementing environmental, social and governance considerations (ESG). 
b)	Making strategies sustainable and limiting their impact on climate change. 
c)	Developing competencies and skills and overcoming resistance to change. 
d)	Continuing the implementation of strategies to see them through to the end. 
e)	Developing new strategies on a continuous basis (always-on strategy). 
f)	Monitoring how strategies impact the environment and stakeholders. g) None of the above. 	c) 	p.382 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
31. Governance is: 
a)	The work of governments, namely programs, services, regulations, taxation, etc. 
b)	A theory that explains the relationship between principals and their agents. 
c)	The approach used for managing information technology priorities. 
d)	The authority that boards of directors (or equivalent) exercise on behalf of the owners, shareholders or other types of investors that they represent. 
e)	The roles and responsibilities of senior executives in directing managers and staff. 
f)	A method to evaluate business cases and make decisions for investments. g) None of the above. 	d) 	p.382 
32. Factors that contribute to ineffective governance include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Deficient board member qualifications and inadequate renewal. 
b)	Lack of board member independence from management. 
c)	Excessive focus on strategies instead of compliance and reporting. 
d)	Too many board committees with unclear roles and responsibilities. 
e)	Too much time spent on golf and other leisure activities at the company expense. 
f)	Not enough time spent meeting face to face (too many virtual meetings). 
g)	Too much gossip on social media and use of smartphones during meetings. h) All of the above. 
	i) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.383-384 
33. Operational leadership is: 
a)	The ability to inspire and direct people to reach organizational goals. 
b)	The ability to articulate meaningful goals, develop sound strategies for achieving them, and implement those strategies successfully. 
c)	The ability to design and put in place effective management frameworks, and to motivate and mobilize employees to perform. 
d)	The ability to apply a leadership style adapted to organizational context. 
e)	The ability to direct operations in a manner that maximizes profits. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.384 
34. A mobilizing leadership style can be effective:  (select all that apply) 
a)	In times of crises and organizational decline. 
b)	In times of recession and financial crises. 
c)	In times of lockdowns and labor union strikes. 
d)	In times of employee disengagement or lack of purpose. 
e)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.386 
35. An affiliative leadership style has the following drawbacks:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Poor performers may take advantage of affiliative leaders. 
b)	Some employees may feel that mediocrity is being tolerated. 
c)	It does not work if employees are not well informed to make decisions. 
d)	It may result in employee stress or burnout. 
e)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.386 
36. A pacesetting leadership style has the following drawbacks:  (select all that apply) 
a)	It does not work if employees are not well informed to make decisions. 
b)	It may result in employee stress or burnout. 
c)	Employees that need direction may feel helpless. 
d)	Some employees may feel disrespected and become resentful. 
e)	None of the above. 	b) 
c) 	 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
37. A democratic leadership style has the following drawbacks:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Does not make sense if employees are not well informed or incompetent. 
b)	May require endless meetings and consensus may be elusive. 
c)	Some employees may feel that not enough direction is provided. 
d)	Not really useful if employees have little motivation for promotions. e) None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.386 
38. Organizational culture is important for organizational alignment because: 
a)	It drives organizational strategies and the risk attitude of employees. 
b)	It helps determine how the execution of strategies should be managed. 
c)	It guides employee thoughts and behaviors, including how they react to changing conditions, new strategies and business models, changes to frameworks, etc. 
d)	It affects the strategic and operational leadership of the organization. e) None of the above. 
	f) 	All of the above. 	c) 	p.387 
39. An unhealth culture where employees lack shared values and principles, and are not motivated and actively engaged is a: a) Weak culture 
b)	Change-resistant culture 
c)	Politicized culture 
d)	Inward-looking culture 
e)	Unethical culture 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.388 
40. An unhealthy culture where employees are arrogant toward customers and have a tendency to neglect of discount stakeholder feed-back is a: a) Weak culture 
b)	Change-resistant culture 
c)	Politicized culture 
d)	Inward-looking culture 
e)	Unethical culture 
f)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.388 
41. An unhealthy culture where employees maneuver to achieve outcomes that are to their advantage, and use deceitful tactics to expand personal or group interests is a: a) Weak culture 
b)	Change-resistant culture 
c)	Politicized culture 
d)	Inward-looking culture 
e)	Unethical culture 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.388 
42. The first step that can be taken to change organizational culture is: 
a)	A statement of the organizational values accompanied with employee training. 
b)	Development of a code of conduct that guides employee behaviors. 
c)	The appointment of a new chief executive officer that can lead by example. 
d)	A diagnostic to analyze what the culture is and what are its shortcomings. 
e)	A process to discipline or dismiss senior executives who misbehave. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.388 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
43. A survey of seven thousand managers and human resource professionals conducted by Deloitte reveals that only _________ of respondents believe that their organization is fostering the right culture: a) Nine percent 
b)	Twelve percent 
c)	Twenty-eight percent 
d)	Thirty-six percent 
e)	Forty-five percent 	b) 	p.388 
44. An organizational structure is: 
a)	A chart that indicates the functional groups within an organization. 
b)	A management framework that outlines leadership positions and committees. 
c)	A chart that explains business divisions, business units and process teams. 
d)	The arrangement of roles, responsibilities and authorities within an organization. e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.389 
45. The following symptoms indicate a misalignment of structure with organizational context:  (select all that apply) a) Absent innovation. 
b)	Slow or faulty decision-making. 
c)	Goals not met and performance declines. 
d)	Rampant organizational conflict. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.390 
46. A well-designed organization structure exists when: 
a)	Organizational units are informed, operate cost-effectively, and implement the individual strategies assigned to each of them. 
b)	Organizational units are aligned, operate effectively together, and support organizational strategies and their implementation. 
c)	Organizational units have plans, priorities and activities that are consistent with organizational goals, strategies and objectives. 
d)	Organizational units are aware of their mission, vision and values, and operate in harmony with their goals, strategies and objectives. 
e)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.390 
47. A vertical organizational structure is:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Better adapted for simple-static environments. 
b)	Better adapted for complex-dynamic environments. 
c)	Suitable for low-cost market strategies. 
d)	Suitable for differentiation market strategies. 
e)	Supportive of control and operational efficiency. 
f)	Supportive of innovation, adaptability and flexibility. 
g)	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 
e) 	p.392 
48. A horizontal organizational structure is:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Better adapted for simple-static environments. 
b)	Better adapted for complex-dynamic environments. 
c)	Suitable for low-cost market strategies. 
d)	Suitable for differentiation market strategies. 
e)	Supportive of control and operational efficiency. 
f)	Supportive of innovation, adaptability and flexibility. 
g)	None of the above. 	b) 
d) 
f) 	p.392 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
49. It can be argued that the most important decision that senior executives make about organizational structure is to: 
a)	Find the right structure that will be a perfect fit for organizational strategies. 
b)	Determine whether a functional structure or a divisional structure should be used. 
c)	Find the right balance between vertical command and control, versus horizontal coordination and flexibility based on organizational context and strategies. 
d)	Determine whether a simple structure or a matrix structure should be used. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.392 
50. Organizations have a tendency to move away from traditional mechanistic management systems and vertical structures because:  (select all that apply) a) Very few organizations operate in a simple-static environment. 
b)	Employees are generally more satisfied with horizontal structures. 
c)	Most managers prefer to delegate and empower employees. 
d)	Many employees prefer to work from home and want less directions. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.393 
51. The following risks are common with functional structures:  (select all that apply) a) General manager burnout. 
b)	Organizational siloes. 
c)	Limited collaboration. 
d)	Implementation challenges. 
e)	Corporate center bureaucracy. 
f)	Conflicting authorities. 
g)	All of the above. 
h)	None of the above. 	b) 
c) 	p.394-395 
52. The following risks are common with divisional structures:  (select all that apply) a) Lack of innovation. 
b)	Organizational siloes. 
c)	Corporate center bureaucracy. 
d)	Customer frustrations. 
e)	Conflicting authorities 
f)	Lower employee engagement 
g)	All of the above. 
h)	None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.396-397 
53. The following risks are common with matrix structures:  (select all that apply) a) General manager burnout. 
b)	Lower employee engagement. 
c)	Corporate center bureaucracy. 
d)	Customer frustrations. 
e)	Conflicting authorities. 
f)	Implementation challenges. 
g)	All of the above. 
h)	None of the above. 	b) 
e) 	p.398-399 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
54. The following risks are common with network structures:  (select all that apply) a) Organizational siloes. 
b)	Structure complexity. 
c)	Lower employee engagement. 
d)	Dependency on management information systems. 
e)	Customer frustrations. 
f)	Implementation challenges. 
g)	All of the above. 
h)	None of the above. 	b) 
d) 	p.400 
55. The following are roles that support coordination:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Leaders and management committees. 
b)	Process teams, cross-functional teams, and project teams. 
c)	Culture, values, codes of conduct. 
d)	Strategic plans, business plans, budgets. 
e)	Information systems and internal control systems. 
f)	Incentives and learning systems. 
g)	All of the above. 
h)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.401 
56. The following are elements that support coordination:   (select all that apply) a) Goals, strategies and objectives. 
b)	Culture, values, codes of conduct. 
c)	Strategic plans, business plans, budgets. 
d)	Policies, authorities and accountabilities. 
e)	Information systems and internal control systems. 
f)	Incentives and learning systems. 
g)	All of the above. 
h)	None of the above. 	g) 	p.401-403 
57. Broadly speaking, goals as a coordination mechanism include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Mission, vision, goals, strategies and objectives. 
b)	Strategic plans, business plans and budgets. 
c)	Policies, authorities and accountabilities. 
d)	Information systems and internal control systems. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.401-403 
58. Examples of leadership roles that support coordination include:  (select all that apply) a) Process owners 
b)	Liaison officers 
c)	Product managers 
d)	Customer account managers 
e)	Relationship managers 
f)	Boundary spanners 
g)	All of the above. 
h)	None of the above. 	g) 	p.401 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
59. Organizational redesign:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Is adopting new goals, strategies, business models or structures in response to changing environmental or market conditions. 
b)	Is the rearrangement of organizational units, management systems, frameworks  and processes to enable organizational renewal. 
c)	May involve renewal, restructuring, reconfiguration or transformation. 
d)	Typically includes downsizing and/or downscoping. 
e)	Usually does not involve retrenchment. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	b) 
d) 	p.403-404 
60. More than __________ of reorganizations fail to deliver satisfactory results within the time planned, and __________ actually destroy value. a) Eighty percent, ten percent 
b)	Sixty percent, ten percent 
c)	Forty percent, five percent 
d)	Twenty percent, five percent 	a) 	p.404 
61. The sources of risk that most often materialize as part of reorganizations are: 
a)	Unclear objectives, insufficient planning and misunderstanding of implications. 
b)	Faulty diagnostic, insufficient planning, weak leadership and resistance to change. 
c)	Confusing analysis, faulty diagnostic, inadequate solutions, faulty implementation. 
d)	Insufficient communications, weak leadership, undefined change imperative. 
e)	Resistance to change, ineffective employee consultations, disgruntled employees. f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.404-405 
 
 
True or False Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Organizational alignment is the harmony among strategies, and among capabilities, management systems and frameworks for achieving them. 	True 	p.366 
2. Organizational alignment is the fit the between organizational purpose and strategies. 	False 	p.366 
3. Organizational theory focusses on how organizational units interact with one another. 	True 	p.366 
4. Organizational theory focuses on the behavior of individuals within organizations. 	False 	p.366 
5. Organizational design looks at organizational arrangements, management systems, management structures, and management frameworks. 	True 	p.366 
6. Organizational design focusses on how organizational units interact with one another. 	False 	p.366 
7. Organizational development concerns the planned evolution and renewal of organizational capabilities, management systems and frameworks. 	True 	p.367 
8. Organizational development focuses on the behavior of people within organizations. 	False 	p.367 
9. Organizational alignment is often an afterthought and a major challenge because many senior executives and managers have a limited understanding of important fields such as organizational theory, organizational design, and organizational development. 	True 	p.366 
10. Organizational alignment is often an afterthought and a major challenge because senior executives and managers are not interested, responsible and accountable for it. 	False 	p.366 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
11. There is never a single or perfect organizational design solution for alignment. 	True 	p.366 
12. There is usually a single and effective organizational design solution for alignment. 	False 	p.366 
13. Significant sources of risk that cause misalignment include: 
a)	Unclear or unassigned responsibilities for organizational alignment; and 
b)	Senior executives who tend to focus separately on strategy versus alignment. 	True 	p.368 
14. Significant sources of risk that cause misalignment include: 
a)	Intergroup conflicts, power struggles and organizational politics; and 
b)	Employee frustrations and decision-making challenges. 	False 	p.368-369 
15. Negative consequences of misalignment include siloed functions, excessive bureaucracy, employee frustrations, intergroup conflicts and power struggles. 	True 	p.369 
16. Negative consequences of misalignment include weak operational leadership, unhealthy cultures, unclear policies, and redundant processes and systems. 	False 	p.369 
17. According to a survey by Bain & Company, the percentage of business leaders who believe that internal dysfunction is the main barrier to profitable growth is 94%. 	True 	p.370 
18. According to a survey by Bain & Company, the percentage of business leaders who believe that internal dysfunction is the main barrier to profitable growth is 38%. 	False 	p.370 
19. An organizations is an open system that needs to adapt to its external environment. 	True 	p.370 
20. An organizations is a closed system that needs to focus on its internal environment. 	False 	p.370 
21. An organic management system is a collegial, horizontal, flexible, and decentralized management approach. It is adapted for complex-dynamic environments. 	True 	p.371, 409 
22. A mechanistic management system is a formal, vertical, hierarchical, and centralized management approach. It is better suited for simple-static environments. 	True 	p.371, 409 
23. A complex-dynamic environment requires organizations to be innovative and adaptable, which is best supported by an organic management system. 	True 	p.371 
24. A simple-static environment requires organizations to focus on operational efficiency, which has traditionally been best supported by a mechanistic management system. 	True 	p.371 
25. It is important to revisit organizational design at each stage of the lifecycle, because organizations have new aspirations and face different challenges at each stage. 	True 	p.371 
26. It is important to revisit organizational design at each stage of the lifecycle, because organizations transition from simple-static to complex-dynamic environments. 	False 	p.371 
27. During the growth phase of the organizational lifecycle, organizations transition from a simple structure to a functional structure for to enable employee specialization. 	True 	p.371 
28. During the growth phase of the organizational lifecycle, organizations typically transition from a simple structure to a matrix structure for better coordination. 	False 	p.371 
29. During the maturity phase of the organizational lifecycle, organizations typically become excessively bureaucratic and need to delegate authority to the frontline. 	True 	p.371 
30. During the maturity phase of the organizational lifecycle, organizations face decline and must become nimble and agile if they want to survive. 	False 	p.371 
31. As they grow, organization tend to become formal, vertical and mechanistic, which is a major source of risk if they operate in a complex and/or dynamic environment. 	True 	p.372 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
32. As they grow, organization tend to become collegial, collaborative, horizontal and organic, especially in response to complex and/or dynamic environment. 	False 	p.372 
33. A low-cost strategy is best supported by formal policies and procedures, vertical structures and hierarchy, centralized decision making, and tight controls. 	True 	p.373 
34. A low-cost strategy is best supported by horizontal and flexible structures, decentralized decision-making and policies and procedures are less formal. 	False 	p.373 
35. A differentiation strategy is best supported by horizontal and flexible structures, decentralized decision-making and policies and procedures are less formal. 	True 	p.373 
36. A differentiation strategy is best supported by formal policies and procedures, vertical structures and hierarchy, centralized decision making, and tight controls. 	False 	p.373 
37. The four capabilities that need to be supported by organizational design are: 
agility, flexibility, coordination and control. 	True 	p.374-376 
38. The four capabilities that need to be supported by organizational design are: 
agility, flexibility, decentralization and oversight. 	False 	p.374-376 
39. In the context of organizational design, decentralization helps organizations respond quickly to changing conditions, and more ability to be agile, creative and innovative. 	True 	p.377 
40. In the context of organizational design, decentralization helps managers exercise control over business units to ensure that organizational goals are implemented. 	False 	p.377 
41. With decentralization, organizational units may become siloed, and not integrate their activities in a manner that optimizes risk-reward relationships. 	True 	p.377 
42. With decentralization, senior executives may become overly immersed in operational activities, and not manage the organization strategically. 	False 	p.377 
43. Common challenges for strategy execution include: poor understanding of strategic priorities, lack of coordination and support, and overly complex and rigid plans. 	True 	p.378-379 
44. Common challenges for strategy execution include: focus on short term performance, micromanagement by senior executives, and resistance to change. 	True 	p.378-379 
45. Common challenges for strategy execution include: unclear mission and vision, undefined implementation plans, and uncoordinated system implementations. 	False 	p.378-379 
46. Foundational components of the strategy execution framework include:  
leadership, culture, capabilities, resources, communications. 	True 	p.380 
47. Foundational components of the strategy execution framework include:  
policies, procedures, structures, coordination mechanisms, information, performance. 	False 	p.380 
48. Structural components of the strategy execution framework include:  
policies, procedures, structures, coordination mechanisms, information, performance. 	True 	p.380 
49. Structural components of the strategy execution framework include:  
leadership, culture, capabilities, resources, communications. 	False 	p.380 
50. A dynamic approach for strategy execution is important because implementation can take several months to several years require course corrections along the way. 	True 	p.381 
51. A dynamic approach for strategy execution is important because senior managers may not be willing to review and update strategies after they have been implemented. 	False 	p.381 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
52. A dynamic approach for strategy execution is particularly important in complex and/or dynamic environments because conditions may change during implementation. 	True 	p.381 
53. A dynamic approach for strategy execution is particularly important in simple and/or static environments because organizations may face unexpected complications. 	True 	p.381 
54. A dynamic approach for strategy execution is particularly important in simple and/or static environments because this kind of environment is sometimes unpredictable. 	False 	p.381 
55. In a dynamic approach to strategy execution, translating the strategy means developing actionable objectives that give direction but are not too prescriptive. 	True 	p.382 
56. In a dynamic approach to strategy execution, translating the strategy means adapting the strategy to existing customers, markets, products and services. 	False 	p.382 
57. In a dynamic approach to strategy execution, adapting the strategy means applying course corrections along the way in response to changing conditions. 	True 	p.382 
58. In a dynamic approach to strategy execution, adapting the strategy means making changes to meet stakeholder expectations, especially customers and investors. 	False 	p.382 
59. In a dynamic approach to strategy execution, sustaining the strategy means developing employee competencies and skills and overcoming resistance to change. 	True 	p.382 
60. In a dynamic approach to strategy execution, sustaining the strategy means making strategies sustainable and limiting their impact on climate change. 	False 	p.382 
61. Governance is the authority that boards of directors (or equivalent) exercise on behalf of the owners, shareholders or other types of investors that they represent. 	True 	p.382 
62. Governance is the approach used for managing information technology priorities. 	False 	p.382 
63. Governance is a theory that explains relationships between principals and their agents. 	False 	p.382 
64. Factors that contribute to ineffective governance include deficient board member qualifications, inadequate renewal, and lack of independence from management. 	True 	p.383-384 
65. Factors that contribute to ineffective governance include excessive focus on strategies and operations, too many committees, and not enough in-person meetings. 	False 	p.383-384 
66. The role of a governance committee at the board level is to recommend governance principles and policies, the selection of board members, and the selection of the CEO. 	True 	p.384 
67. The role of a governance committee at the board level is to appoint the chairperson, manage the agenda of the board, and make decisions regarding governance policies. 	False 	p.384 
68. Operational leadership is the ability to design and put in place effective management frameworks, and to motivate and mobilize employees to perform. 	True 	p.384 
69. Operational leadership is the ability to articulate meaningful goals, develop sound strategies for achieving them, and implement those strategies successfully. 	False 	p.384 
70. A mobilizing leadership style can be effective in times of employee disengagement, and when employees lack a sense of purpose and motivation. 	True 	p.384 
71. A mobilizing leadership style can be effective in times crises and organizational decline, or when there are economic challenges such as a recession, high inflation, etc. 	False 	p.384 
72. An affiliative leadership style creates a collaborative working environment, but poor performers make take advantage of affiliative leaders willing to tolerate mediocrity. 	True 	p.384 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
73. An affiliative leadership style motivates employees through consensus, but it does not make sense if employees are not well informed or incompetent. 	False 	p.384 
74. A pacesetting leadership style sets high expectations and works well when employees are competent and motivated, but it may result in employee stress and burnout. 	True 	p.384 
75. A pacesetting leadership style provides coaching and delegates responsibilities to employees, but it does not work if the leader is very busy or lacks mentoring skills. 	False 	p.384 
76. A democratic leadership style builds trust and commitment by giving employees a voice, discussions may require endless meetings and consensus may be elusive. 	True 	p.384 
77. A democratic leadership style requires employees to elect a leader that will represent their interests, but it may not work well if employees are disengaged or incompetent. 	False 	p.384 
78. Organizational culture is important for organizational alignment because it guides employee thoughts and behaviors, including how they react to changing conditions. 	True 	p.387 
79. Organizational culture is important for organizational alignment because it helps determine how the execution of strategies should be managed. 	False 	p.387 
80. The first step that should be taken to change organizational culture is a diagnostic to understand and analyze the existing culture is and its shortcomings. 	True 	p.388 
81. The first step that should be taken to change organizational culture is to develop a statement of values and communicate the values across the organization. 	False 	p.388 
82. A survey of seven thousand managers and human resource professionals conducted by Deloitte reveals that only twenty-eight percent understand the culture of their organization, and only twelve percent believe that the right culture is being fostered. 	True 	p.388 
83. An organizational structure is the arrangement of roles, responsibilities and authorities within an organization. It is reflected by an organizational chart that depicts the various groups, positions and reporting relationships within an organization. 	True 	p.389 
84. An organizational structure is a management framework that applies an organic or mechanistic style of management across management functions and business units. 	False 	p.389 
85. Symptoms of misalignment between structure and organizational context include absent innovation, slow or faulty decisions, performance decline and rampant conflict. 	True 	p.390 
86. Symptoms of misalignment between structure and organizational context include lack of engagement, resistance to change, organizational politics, and unethical conduct. 	False 	p.390 
87. Every organizational structure has strategy and performance-related strengths and weaknesses. There is no magic solution to organizational design. 	True 	p.390 
88. A vertical organizational structure is better adapted for simple-static environments. 	True 	p.392 
89. A vertical organizational structure is better adapted for complex-dynamic environments. 	False 	p.392 
90. A horizontal organizational structure is better adapted for complex-dynamic environments. 	True 	p.392 
91. A horizontal organizational structure is better adapted for simple-static environments. 	False 	p.392 
92. A vertical organizational structure supports control and operational efficiency. 	True 	p.392 
93. A horizontal organizational structure supports innovation, adaptability and flexibility. 	True 	p.392 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
94. It can be argued that the most important decision that senior executives make about organizational structure is to find the right balance between vertical command and control, versus horizontal coordination and flexibility based on context and strategies. 	True 	p.392 
95. Organizations have a tendency to move away from mechanistic management systems and vertical structures because managers like to delegate and empower employees. 	False 	p.392 
96. The risks of functional structures include organizational siloes, limited collaboration between organizational functions, and a lack of innovation for the organization. 	True 	p.394-395 
97. The risks of functional structures include general manager burnout, implementation challenges, corporate center bureaucracy and conflicting authorities. 	False 	p.394-395 
98. The risks of divisional structures include collaboration and coordination challenges corporate center bureaucracy and customer frustrations. 	True 	p.396-397 
99. The risks of divisional structures include organizational siloes, lack of innovation, conflicting authorities, and lower employee engagement. 	False 	p.396-397 
100. The risks of matrix structures include conflicting authorities, unproductive meetings, higher overhead costs, employee frustrations and lower employee engagement. 	True 	p.398-399 
101. The risks of matrix structures include general manager burnout, corporate center bureaucracy, customer frustrations, and implementation challenges. 	False 	p.398-399 
102. The risks of network structures include structure complexity, management information systems failures, and contractual agreement deficiencies. 	True 	p.400 
103. The risks of network structures include implementation challenges, lower employee engagement, customer frustrations, and general manager burnout. 	False 	p.400 
104. Coordination mechanisms are management practices, processes, methods and techniques that facilitate collaboration and integration across organizational units. 	True 	p.401 
105. Organizational roles that support coordination include process owners, liaison officers, relationship managers, product managers, and customer account managers. 	True 	p.401 
106. Organizational elements that support coordination include goals, culture, plans, policies, authorities, accountabilities, information systems, and learning systems. 	True 	p.401-403 
107. Organizational redesign is the rearrangement of organizational units, management systems, frameworks and processes to enable organizational renewal. 	True 	p.403 
108. Organizational redesign is adopting new goals, strategies, business models or structures in response to changing environmental or market conditions. 	False 	p.403 
109. The four sources of risk that most often materialize as part of reorganizations are: 
faulty diagnostic, insufficient planning, weak leadership and resistance to change. 	True 	p.404-405 
110. The four sources of risk that most often materialize as part of reorganizations are: 
confusing analysis, faulty diagnostic, inadequate solutions, faulty implementation. 	False 	p.404-405 
111. More than eighty percent of reorganizations fail to deliver satisfactory results within the time planned, and ten percent actually destroy value. 	True 	p.404 
112. Only eighty percent of reorganizations deliver satisfactory results within the time planned, and the other twenty percent are implementation failures. 	False 	p.404 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 9  
Operations Management Risks 
 
 
Review Questions 
 
1. Operations management 
 
a)	What is operations management?   (p.422) 
Operations management is the management of organizational systems, processes and activities that create products and services, and/or make them available to customers. In manufacturing organizations, operations management is sometimes called production management. Both terms are synonymous, although production management is typically given a narrower meaning that excludes sourcing and distribution. 
 
b)	What are the components of operations management?   (p.422) 
Operations management covers the range of activities required for sourcing, production design, production execution, and the distribution or delivery of goods and services. Operations management also includes support functions that help ensure the reliability, safety and security of sourcing, production and distribution activities. 
 
c)	Explain how operations management applies to service organizations.   (p.422-423) 
Organizations that manufacture products have a very different context from those that provide services such as hospitals, municipalities and colleges. Nonetheless, service organizations apply operations management in a similar manner to manufacturers. For instance, a hospital acquires medical supplies and equipment, develops operational plans, schedules patients, performs health treatments, and monitors patient recovery. When analyzing the activities of organizations that produce goods versus those that deliver services, it becomes clear that their operations management activities are quite similar.  The difference is the nature of the outputs produced. 
 
d)	Briefly explain the five objectives of operations management.   (p.423-424) Operations need to be productive, cost-effective, reliable, safe and secure. 
•	Productivity - ratio of outputs to inputs 
•	Cost-effectiveness - input and production costs relative to activities or outputs 
•	Reliability - dependability in achieving production plans and quality targets 
•	Safety - amount of workplace or customer accidents, injuries or deaths 
•	Security - amount of issues and losses associated with undesirable behavior and criminality 
 
e)	Define operations management risks.   (p.425) 
Risks associated with designing and maintaining productive, cost-effective, reliable, safe and secure sourcing, production and distribution arrangements to support organizational strategies. The sources of risk of operations management are those originating from supply chains and internal production systems, processes, activities and methods. 
 
2. Supply chain management 
 
a)	What is a supply chain?   (p.425) 
A supply chain is the combination of organizations that collaborate in providing goods and services to customers [from end to end]. 
 
b)	What is supply chain management?   (p.425) 
Supply chain management is the planning, creation and operation of a supply chain.  It is about making sure that proper arrangements are in place for effectively coordinating the work of suppliers, producers and distributors to ensure that goods and services are delivered as required across the supply chain to meet operational objectives. 
 
c)	What are the four supply chain risks?   (p.426-428) 
The sources of risk applicable to supply chains are those that can impede the ability to plan, create and operate supply chains effectively, thereby preventing goods and services from being delivered satisfactorily. For ease of reference, these sources of risk can be grouped into categories. 
•	Customer demand anticipation 
•	Supply chain integration 
•	Supply chain resilience 
•	Supplier ethics 
 
d)	Briefly explain one of them and how it can be managed.   (p.426-428) Students may choose from the following: 
Risk 	Description 	Management 
Customer demand  
anticipation 	Properly anticipating demand to avoid over or under capacity or actual supply. 	•	Linkages with marketing and sales 
•	Demand forecasting 
•	Demand-driven supply chains 
Supply chain integration 	Sourcing plans, sharing of demand information, constant communications, compatible information systems. 	•	Supplier relationships management 
•	Cooperative forecasting system 
•	Assurance that information is protected 
Supply chain resilience 	Reliability and dependability of the supply chain to provide quality goods and services to others on a timely basis.  	•	Modeling supply chain vulnerabilities 
•	Extended ERM framework 
Supplier ethics 	Reputation of each supply chain participant reflects upon and affects the reputation of all other participants. 	•	Anti-corruption programs 
•	Supplier risk assessment, training, monitoring, whistleblowing, sanctions 
•	Working with other stakeholders and industry peers to fight corruption. 
 
3. Supply chain management – Extended enterprise risk management 
 
a)	Explain extended enterprise risk management (EERM).   (p.430) 
An extended enterprise risk management (EERM) framework is a risk management framework that covers or extends to suppliers and distributors. It is normally developed by OEMs to:  
1)	Monitor the risk management practices of participants in a supply chain 
2)	Ensure that participants maintain the continuity of their operations 
3)	Ensure that participants act legally and ethically, in ways that protect the reputation of others  
 
b)	Outline two examples of EERM techniques.   (p.430) Students may choose from the following: 
Governance and  corporate management 	• 
• 	Analysis of background 
Assessment of expertise and reputation 
	• 	Review of audit reports 
Compliance and reputation 	• 	Risk sensing to monitor reputation 
	• 	Review of complaints and indictments 
Risk management 	• 	Existence of supplier ERM function 
	• 	Review of risk management practices 
	• 	Enquiries about operations risk and responses 
Production quality  and performance 	• 
• 	Analysis of supplier operations systems 
Examination of production performance management 
	• 	Review of supplier track record 
	• 	Supplier ISO certifications 
Information systems 	• 	Enquiries on control and security practices 
	• 	Independent review or audit of data protection 
Financial stability 	• 	Assessment of financial viability 
	• 	Review of payment track record 
	• 	Review of credit ratings 
Business continuity 	• 	Review of business continuity plans 
	• 	Inspection of contingency arrangements and tests 
 
4. Sourcing 
 
a)	What are the objectives of sourcing?   (p.431) The objectives of sourcing are to: 
1)	Obtain goods and services that meet requirements 
2)	Obtain them at the right time 
3)	Obtain them at competitive prices 
4)	Pay only for what is actually received 
 
b)	What are the risks of sourcing?   (p.431) 
The risks of sourcing are the uncertainties that can impede the achievement of sourcing objectives. They include not properly defining what is needed, not soliciting or selecting the right suppliers, not negotiating advantageous terms, not getting what is needed at the right time, and paying more than what is obtained. Each of those risks has direct linkages with sourcing activities. 
 
c)	What are the activities of the sourcing process?   (p.432) 
 
 
5. Sourcing – Supplier selection 
 
a)	What is supplier selection?   (p.433) 
Supplier selection is choosing suppliers that provide the best overall value and present the lowest sourcing risks. The main value criteria for supplier selection are price, product or service quality, flexibility to handle changing requirements, capacity to deliver on a timely basis, location and transportation costs, reputation, past performance, warranties, and after sales service. 
 
b)	What is the main risk of supplier selection?   (p.433) 
The main risk associated with supplier selection is the inability to obtain [from selected suppliers} products and services that meet requirements on a timely basis. (…) Maverick buying is also a significant source of risk if there is no formal supplier selection process. 
 
c)	What are the five practices for mitigating the risk of supplier selection?   (p.434-435) 
•	Creation of supply categories 
•	Supplier pre-qualification 
•	Supplier certification 
•	Mechanisms for decentralized procurement 
•	Approach for unanticipated requirements 
 
d)	Briefly explain one of the five practices.   (p.434-435) 
•	Creation of supply categories - to help determine appropriate sourcing strategies • Supplier pre-qualification - determine in advance who provides value for money • Supplier certification - due diligence to obtain assurance that the supplier is reliable. 
•	Mechanisms for decentralized procurement - procurement cards, list of proposed vendors 
•	Approach for unanticipated requirements - sole sourcing for special or unusual circumstances 
 
6. Sourcing – Contracting and ordering 
 
a)	When should a contract for the purchase of goods or services be issued?   (p.435) 
As a general rule, a contract for the purchase of goods or services should be issued whenever a simple purchase order is not sufficient to adequately protect the interests of the buying organization. Accordingly, it is normally the buying organization that initiates contract negotiation and issues a contract. However, suppliers may also issue contracts, especially regarding warranties, after sales service, buy-back arrangements or volume discounts. 
 
b)	Describe two types supply contracts where risks are transferred to suppliers.   (p.435) Students may choose from the following: 
Buy-Back Contract 	The supplier agrees to buy-back unused or unsold goods at a pre-determined price. In this case, the buyer transfers the risks of unused or unsold goods to the supplier. In turn, the supplier may obtain a better price for the goods purchased by the buyer. 
QuantityFlexibility 
Contract 	The supplier agrees to provide a full or partial refund for unused or unsold goods, provided that the number of items returned does not exceed an agreed-upon limit. In this case, the buyer transfers a portion of the risks of unused or unsold products to the supplier. 
Revenue- 
Sharing 
Contract 	The supplier agrees to provide goods or services at a discount, in return for a share of the revenues generated by the buyer. In this case, the buyer transfers to the supplier a portion of the risks associated with product or service demand from the final customers. 
CapacityReservation 
Contract 	The supplier agrees to reserve production capacity for the buyer, in return for a fee. In this case, the buyer pays for assurance that the supplier will be able to produce the goods or services required, up to an agreed-upon level, at any time during the contract. 
Advance-
Purchase 
Contract 	The supplier agrees to build additional production capacity in return for an advanced payment from the buyer. In this case, the buyer obtains assurance that demand will be met. 
In turn, the supplier transfers the risk of demand or unused capacity to the buyer. 
 
7. Receiving and payments 
 
a) Explain how the risk of payment is managed in the receiving and payment process.   (p.437) 
•	Matching of documents - purchase order, packing slip, receiving report, supplier invoice. 
•	Resolution of discrepancies - accounting does not process payments until discrepancies are 
resolved between what has been ordered vs received in good condition vs invoiced. 
 
8. Production design 
 
a)	What is production design?   (p.438) 
Production design is the planning and implementation of the working arrangements needed to produce organizational products and services. It is driven by the market strategies of the organization, and the nature of its products and services. 
b)	What are the six production design activities?   (p.438) 
• 
• 
• 	Demand forecasting 
Capacity planning 
Location selection 	• 
• 
• 	Production process design 
Plant layout design 
Production job design 
 
c)	Explain how demand forecasting risks can be mitigated.   (p.441) 
•	Flexible production systems - ability to make adjustments to production more easily 
•	Use of more than one forecasting method - compare and analyze results, validate results 
•	Monitor the accuracy of forecasts - compare with actuals, analyze differences, update methods 
 
d)	Explain how location selection risks can be mitigated.   (p.442) 
•	Identify and analyze key decision factors - resources, workforce, proximity to suppliers and markets, public services, political context, physical environment, financial context, etc. 
•	Use a factor rating method to assess the desirability of each location - numerical scale for each decision factor, rate each location for all factors, tabulate the results for each location. 
 
9. Production execution 
 
a)	What is production execution?   (p.445) 
Production execution is the management activities done to plan, coordinate and operate a production system. The management activities include aggregate planning, production run scheduling, inventory management, and the management of production performance. 
 
b)	What is the purpose of production execution?   (p.445) The purpose of production execution is to ensure that: 
•	Short-term demand for products and services is met 
•	Production runs are scheduled in the proper sequence to optimize productivity 
•	There is an adequate level of materials, supplies, work in process and finished goods 
•	Products and services meet quality standards and customer expectations 
•	Production costs are kept to the minimum, and operations are effective 
 
10. Production execution – Aggregate planning 
 
a.	What is aggregate planning?   (p.446) 
Aggregate planning is devising the logistics of production to meet demand forecasts in the shortterm. In practice, aggregate planning typically covers the next 3 to 18 months.  The purpose of aggregate planning is to find the best, most productive approach to meet demand, minimize production costs, and optimize the use of resources and facilities. 
 
b.	Explain the five capacity management techniques for aggregate planning.   (p.447) 
Working hours 	Motivate employees to work overtime when demand is high; ask employees to accept reduced hours when demand is low to avoid possible layoffs. 
Staffing levels 	Adjust staffing levels using part-time or permanent workers in times of high demand, and attrition, leave or layoffs when demand is low. 
Production shifts 	Add production shifts when demand is high, using overtime and staffing arrangements; reduce shifts or plan work stoppages when demand is low. 
Stockpiling 	Stockpile finished goods when demand is low to maintain a relatively constant level of production, avoid layoffs, and meet higher demand later. 
Subcontracting 	Subcontract or outsource production to suppliers to meet higher than expected demand that cannot otherwise be met with existing facilities. 
11. Production execution – Inventory management 
 
a.	What is inventory management?   (p.448) 
Inventory management is the management of supplies, raw materials, work-in-process and finished products. Manufacturing, distribution and retail companies carry a lot of inventory. 
 
b.	Describe three inventory management techniques that mitigate risks.   (p.449) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Classification - more attention to inventories that are more important or higher inherent risk 
•	Cost analysis - determine optimal order quantities and inventory levels that minimize costs 
•	Ordering models - economic order quantity, reorder points 
•	Safety stock - amount of inventory required to avoid production interruptions 
•	Pooling - analyze trade-offs of centralizing vs decentralizing the warehousing of inventory 
•	Storage and security - measures to prevent inventory waste (spoilage) and theft 
•	Tracking - perpetual inventory tracking system, physical inventory counts, investigations 
 
12. Distribution 
 
a.	What is distribution?   (p.452) 
Distribution is making products and services available for purchase by customers, and fulfilling customer orders. The customers may be other organizations or individual consumers depending on the nature of the products and services. In the case of products, distribution involves a combination of activities including warehousing, shipping, transportation, receiving and retailing. In the case of services, distribution involves opening a place of business to take orders, and carrying out the services either at the place of business or at client sites.  
 
b.	What are the risks of distribution?   (p.453) 
•	The main risks of distribution are not making products and services available to end customers as effectively as competitors do (resulting in lower revenues), or incurring excessive distribution costs (resulting in lower profitability). 
•	Establishing distribution channels can be complicated requires satisfying the buying preferences of end customers on one hand, and the needs of distribution channel participants on the other. Conflicts occur when channel members have dissimilar goals, especially regarding profit sharing, distribution exclusivity or selling competing brands. 
 
c.	How are the risks of distribution managed?   (p.453) Main risks: 
•	Understanding customers and finding effective ways to reach them 
•	Carefully selecting channel partners and negotiating favorable terms with them 
•	Experimenting with various distribution channels 
Risks of conflicts with distribution channel participants 
•	Selecting channel participants that have compatible goals, value open communications, and are committed to making business relationships work. 
•	Distribution arrangements should be confined in writing. Complex arrangements require a formal contract with clear terms of reference. 
 
13. Plant equipment and maintenance 
 
a)	What are the risks of inadequate maintenance?   (p.454) 
•	Unplanned interruptions 
•	Shorter useful life of assets 
•	Higher capital expenditures 
•	Legal liabilities if industrial accidents take place 
b)	Briefly explain the three basic choices for maintenance.   (p.454) 
•	Reactive maintenance - wait until a breakdown or failure occurs before taking action. 
•	Preventive maintenance - routine inspections, scheduled tune-ups and parts replacement 
•	Predictive maintenance - constant monitoring using sensors to evaluate equipment conditions  
 
14. Workplace health and safety 
 
a)	What is workplace health and safety?   (p.455) 
Workplace safety and health is maintaining safe and healthy working conditions that prevent employee injuries, illnesses and fatalities. 
 
b)	Outline three examples of employer responsibilities for health and safety.   (p.455) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Providing workplace safety and health training to employees 
•	Providing protective clothing and equipment at no cost to employees 
•	Preventing exposure to harmful chemicals and infectious diseases 
•	Securing areas to prevent falls and putting guards on dangerous machines • Ensuring the safety of employees that enter confined spaces and high structures 
•	Maintaining adequate ventilation, temperature, humidity, lighting, etc. 
•	Performing tests to measure air quality, noise levels, water quality, etc. 
•	Keeping accurate records of work-related accidents, injuries and illnesses 
•	Reporting work related accidents, injuries, hospitalizations and fatalities 
•	Informing employees of regulatory warnings, fines, and corrective actions 
 
c)	Explain how employers mitigate the risks of workplace health and safety.   (p.455) 
•	Employers mitigate the risks of workplace health and safety by establishing safety and health programs, and assigning responsibility for these programs to qualified employees.  
•	Health and safety programs include workplace assessments, employee education and training, and corrective actions to address workplace issues. 
•	Employers contribute to workers compensation insurance, which indemnifies employees and their families in the event of work-related injuries and fatalities. In return for compensation, employees generally cannot take legal action against their employer.   
 
15. Fleet management 
 
a)	What is fleet management?   (p.456) 
Fleet management is the management of vehicles, trains, ships or aircrafts used to transport goods, animals or people. (…) The purpose of fleet management is to ensure that fleet operations are reliable, safe, cost-effective, and in compliance with legal and regulatory obligations. 
 
b)	What are the six components of a fleet management system?   (p.456) Vehicles, Drivers, Cargoes, Routes, Schedules, Safety devices 
 
c)	Outline the risk management techniques for two components.   (p.456) Students may choose from the following: 
Components 	Risk Management Techniques 
Vehicles 		Selection – ensure that the vehicles are suitable for their intended use. 
	Safety features –  ensure that vehicles have good safety features such as wipers, mirrors, brakes, lights, reflectors, audible back-up signals, tire pressure sensors, etc. 
	Maintenance – properly maintain the vehicles to prevent breakdowns and accidents. 
	Replacement – determine when vehicles should be replaced to avoid breakdowns. 
	Insurance – obtain vehicle insurance that cover all potential losses and liabilities. 
 
Components 	Risk Management Techniques 
Drivers 		Selection – screen applicants for licensing, driving record, experience, etc. 
	Training – train drivers on the use of vehicles, defensive driving, road safety, etc. 
	Supervision – monitor drivers through radio contact, global positioning systems, etc. 
	Testing – randomly test drivers for substance abuse such as alcohol and drugs. 
Cargoes 		Suitability – ensure that the vehicle is suitable for the cargo being transported. 
	Loading – do not overload vehicles and check regulations for weight, height, etc. 
	Security – secure the cargo with appropriate devices such as chains, straps, etc. 
Routes 	 Suitability – select routes that present less risks of accidents for dangerous materials.  Distance – when possible, select shorter more economical routes to reduce costs. 
Schedules 		Deadlines – schedule enough time for drivers to complete their routes without rushing. 
	Rest periods – schedule rest periods and limit the hours of driving per regulations. 
	Incentives – ensure that performance incentives do not cause drivers take risks such  as driving too fast or too many hours, and reward drivers for their safety record. 
Safety devices 		Speed – install speed tracking and speed limiting devices on vehicles. 
	Traction – inspect tires regularly and install tire pressure monitors. 
	Stability – equip vehicles with stability control systems and anti-lock brakes. 
	Scales – install scales that measure weight per axle to maintain proper load balance. 
	Warnings – install lane departure warning systems and collision warning systems. 
	Video – install front and back video cameras for vision, surveillance and evidence. 
 	 
16. Business continuity management 
 
a)	What is business continuity management?   (p.457) 
Business continuity management is planning and taking actions to prevent and react to events that threaten the continuity of operations. Such events include natural disasters, industrial accidents, cybercrime, vandalism and terrorism. The purpose of business continuity management is to maintain the continuity of operations during such events, and restore a normal state of operations as quickly as possible. 
 
b)	Briefly outline the approach for developing a business continuity plan.   (p.457) 
1)	Define business continuity objectives  - How long an interruption is tolerable and how much time is acceptable for restoring normal operations.  
2)	Identify critical functions  –  Essential or crucial product and service areas, and enablers  (e.g. power, critical machinery) that would cause interruptions or major challenges. 
3)	Conduct a business impact analysis  –  Identify and analyze threats to critical functions. Analyze vulnerabilities, time to rectify problems, tolerable and intolerable delays. 
4)	Develop a business continuity risk profile  –  Identify and assess business continuity risks. Determine the significance of the residual risks and whether they are acceptable. 
5)	Develop the business continuity plan  –  Prevent interruptions and mitigate their effects. Assign responsibilities. Establish contingency arrangements such as alternative sites, power generators, back-up computers, outsourcing arrangements, etc. Communicate the plan. 
6)	Implement and test the business continuity plan  –  Train the employees who are assigned responsibilities. Conduct tests to verify that employees are able to carry out their responsibilities, and that the contingency arrangements are functional. 
7)	Update the business continuity plan  –  Update the plan based on testing results, and whenever internal and external conditions change, including the departure of key employees. Assign responsibilities for updating the plan. Test the plan annually. 
 
 
 
17. Crisis management 
 
a)	What is crisis management?   (p.458) 
Crisis management is the planning and actions taken for responding to crises satisfactorily, in accordance with stakeholder expectations, and in ways that protect organizational reputation. 
 
b)	What are the main components of a crisis management plan?   (p.459) The main components of a crisis management plan include: 
1)	defining what constitutes a crisis;  
2)	establishing a protocol for activating crisis management;  
3)	assigning roles and responsibilities for crisis management and communications; and  
4)	identifying suppliers and support groups that can supplement organizational capabilities, and negotiating arrangements for obtaining support services on a short notice. 
 
c)	What actions help ensure an adequate state of readiness for crisis management?   (p.459) 
•	Make crisis management planning an organizational priority. 
•	Develop a crisis management plan and communicate it to all employees. 
•	Assign crisis management responsibilities at the executive and board levels. 
•	Identify risks that can result in crisis situations and determine how to respond. 
•	Assign risk ownership to leaders and teams able to respond in the event of crises. 
•	Establish protocols and responsibilities for communications in times of crises. 
•	Train employees on their assigned roles and responsibilities for crisis management. 
•	Test the implementation of the crisis management plan using simulation exercises. 
•	Assign responsibilities for communicating the plan and keeping it current. 
 
d)	Briefly explain three communication practices advisable during a crisis.   (p.460) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Involve senior officials with communications - Chief executive officer or chairperson leads communications. Only one senior official designated as spokesperson. Senior official visible to the media and general public, and always remain calm, serious and reassuring. 
•	Communicate frequently and sincerely - Issue written statements, avoid going off script to prevent confusion, errors and blunders. Spokesperson demonstrates empathy, authenticity and determination to resolve the problem at hand. 
•	Stick to the facts and never speculate - Stick to the facts. Avoid making assumptions about the events and their causes. The facts known communicated without delay as they become available. Investigation is ongoing to determine the causes. Collaboration with authorities. 
•	Promise to find all of the answers - Demonstrate firm commitment to get to the bottom and find answers. Better to say “we do not have the information at this time” or “that is something we are actively looking into” than to skip questions or to offer a “no comment” response. 
•	Accept the problem and commit to fixing it - Take ownership of the problem without admitting guilt. Demonstrate strong commitment to fix the problem. Address the problem satisfactorily. Taking appropriate action during and after the accident or event. 
 
 
Other Short Answer Questions 
 
1.	What is the main purpose of operations management?   (p.423) 
The main purpose of operations management is to produce goods and services that are consistent with the chosen market strategy of an organization. 
 
 
 
2.	Explain what is productivity and provide a few examples of indicators.   (p.423) 
Productivity is a measure of the ratio of outputs to inputs. The ratio can be expressed in production units or costs. Productivity is analogous to efficiency, but it has a broader meaning. For instance, organizations can improve their productivity by upgrading their machinery and equipment, by contrast with efficiency which measures ratios using the same machinery and equipment over time. 
Examples of indicators: 
•	Number of products made per raw materials used 
•	Amount of services delivered per labor hours 
•	Number of products made per plant, per month 
•	Dollar value of production versus production costs 
 
3.	Explain why operational performance and risks need to be managed very effectively.   (p.424) 
•	Very large portion of costs - small variation have huge impact on profitability 
•	Relates to core operations - hugely embarrassing to reputation when risks materialize 
•	Broad activities - almost certain that an organization will encounter issues over time 
 
4.	What is a good approach to identify sources of risks relating to operations management?   (p.425) A good approach to identify these sources of risk is to analyze supply chains holistically, and then analyze each component of operations management individually. These components include sourcing activities, production design, production execution, distribution, and operational support functions. 
 
5.	How would you describe supply chain risks in general?   (p.426) 
The sources of risk applicable to supply chains are those that can impede the ability to plan, create and operate supply chains effectively, thereby preventing goods and services from being delivered satisfactorily. For ease of reference, these sources of risk can be grouped into categories. They include customer demand anticipation, supply chain integration, supply chain resilience and supplier ethics. 
 
6.	Briefly explain why customer demand anticipation is a source of risk for supply chains, and what techniques can be used for managing this source of risk.   (p.426) 
Managing a supply chain rests on anticipating customer demand. When customer demand is well anticipated, sourcing, production and distribution can be optimized, and inventory levels kept to a minimum across the supply chain. Overestimating customer demand creates an inventory build-up, tied to excessive sourcing, production and warehousing costs. By contrast, underestimating customer demand leads to product or service shortages, customer dissatisfaction and lost revenues. The ability to anticipate customer demand is therefore an important source of risk. 
•	Linkages with marketing and sales - understand drivers of demand, planned initiatives, etc. 
•	Demand forecasting - continuously improve forecasting with the help of marketing and sales 
•	Demand-driven supply chains - monitor customer sales and flow information on a real time basis 
 
7.	Identify two internal and two external sources of risk affecting supply chain resilience.   (p.428) 
Internal sources 	External sources 
•	Machinery and equipment malfunction 
•	Production capacity and bottlenecks 
•	Labor relations resulting in strikes 
•	Unreliable management information 
•	Untimely delivery of products and services 
•	Product or service quality issues 
•	Contractual disputes with suppliers 
•	Supplier reliability and financial stability 
•	Theft and losses of inventory 	•	Acts of nature - e.g. earthquakes, storms 
•	Geopolitical issues - e.g. conflicts, wars 
•	Economic issues - e.g. tariffs, duties, taxes  
 
 
8.	Explain why supplier ethics is a source of risk applicable to supply chains.   (p.430) The reputation of supply chains participants and especially OEMs is particularly vulnerable to unethical conduct from other supply chain participants. For example, the reputation of an OEM can be severely impacted if it is discovered that it buys goods or services from suppliers that provide unsafe working conditions or unfair wages to workers. Reputation can also be severely impacted when supply chain participants engage in corrupt business practices. Another important source of risk regarding supplier ethics is environmental protection. Consumers put pressure on organizations to adopt responsible and sustainable environmental practices. 
 
9.	Outline sourcing strategies based on sourcing risks and profit impact.   (p.433) 
	Competitive items	Strategic items
Goods and services in this category involve Goods and services in this category involve low sourcing risks, but a high profit impact. high sourcing risks and a high profit impact. 
High	Examples: commodities, raw materials	Examples: complex, expensive components Sourcing strategies for these items:	Sourcing strategies for these items:
•	regular supplier solicitation for quotes	• certified supplier and long term contract
•	spot purchases, hedging strategies	• vertical integration or strategic alliances
Profit Impact
	Trivial items 	Complex items
Goods and services in this category involve Goods and services in this category involve low sourcing risks and a low profit impact. high sourcing risks, but a low profit impact. 
Low	Examples: Office supplies, small tools	Examples: customized, inexpensive parts Sourcing strategies for these items:	Sourcing strategies for these items:
•	decentralization of procurement	• authorized supplier list and/or contract
•	proposed vendor list, procurement cards	• safety stock, advanced ordering
	Low	Sourcing	High
Risks
 
 
10.	What is maverick buying, and how can it be prevented?   (p.433) 
Maverick buying occurs when organizational units buy from whatever suppliers they choose.  Since maverick buying is typically not conducted independently, transparently, and with proper controls, it must be discouraged and sanctioned [penalized]. In particular, maverick buying exposes the organization to procurement corruption and fraud. In addition, it prevents the integration of procurement to get better deals from suppliers [i.e. negotiating volume discounts]. To prevent maverick buying and maintain the integrity of the sourcing process, purchasing departments must demonstrate leadership. They do so by establishing supply categories, qualifying or certifying suppliers proactively, developing effective mechanisms to support decentralized procurement, and responding effectively to unanticipated sourcing requirements. 
 
11.	Explain the difference between supplier pre-qualification and supplier certification.   (p.434) 
•	Supplier pre-qualification - Preselection of suppliers by stating requirements, soliciting quotes or proposals, and evaluating the submissions (bids) received against criteria. (…) Once a supplier is selected, it can be included on a vendor list, an authorized supplier list, or issued a contract. 
•	Supplier certification - Rigorous assessment of supplier policies, practices, capabilities, reputation and past performance. It is a form of due diligence aimed at providing assurance that a supplier is very reliable and capable of meeting or exceeding requirements.  The certification process normally includes site visits and a review of the operations management practices of the supplier. 
 
12.	When are procurement contracts particularly useful?   (p.437) 
A contract for the purchase of goods or services should be issued whenever a simple purchase order is not sufficient to adequately protect the interests of the buying [and/or selling] organization. Contracts are useful for managing complex relationships with suppliers because they define terms and conditions, the roles and responsibilities of the buyer and supplier, and how potential conflicts must be resolved. Contracts also include provisions for termination by the buyer and seller.  
13.	Who should be assigned the role of contracting authority and why?   (p.436) 
The authority to sign contracts should rest with the purchasing department. This approach prevents maverick buying and ensures that organizations are not unduly committed to unknown purchase agreements across organizational units. This approach also helps prevent procurement abuse, corruption and fraud. The authority to negotiate, sign and amend contracts is the called the contracting authority. Every contract should have a designated person acting as contracting authority, who is independent from the organizational unit obtaining the product or service 
 
14.	Describe how supplier performance should be monitored.   (p.437) 
Supplier performance should be monitored on an ongoing basis by the purchasing department.  In doing so, the purchasing department should obtain feed-back from the users of goods and services, as well as the receiving and accounting departments. Key indicators of performance include competitive prices, product or service quality, on-time delivery, receiving discrepancies, resolution of issues, and after sales service. Suppliers should be advised of their performance on a regular basis. When performance issues persist and become unacceptable, suppliers should be taken off preferred lists and their contracts terminated in accordance with cancellation terms and conditions. 
 
15.	Explain the importance of cross-functional teams in product design.   (p.439) 
In practice, many organizations fail to establish effective cross-functional product design teams. Not implementing this integration mechanism can result in products or services that are not responsive to customer needs. It may also result in over or underestimating market demand, or developing prototypes that look appealing but cannot be manufactured cost-effectively. Establishing a crossfunctional team, and defining clear roles and responsibilities between marketing, engineering and operations management mitigate the risks of product design. 
 
16.	Explain why applying a rigid management system or process is not advisable for product development.   (p.439) 
A common mistake in product design is to apply an overly rigid system or process for development. Many organizations have a tendency to manage product design initiatives in ways similar to production activities,  usually because managers do not appropriately differentiate product design from production. When product design is managed mechanistically (as is often the case with production activities), product development teams avoid taking risks. This situation can lead to product design failures if it limits innovation and experimentation. Rigid processes also discourage employees from making suggestions, or even wanting to participate in product development teams. Missed opportunities are a significant risk in product design. 
 
17.	What are three sound approaches for mitigating the risks of product design failures?   (p.439) 
•	Cross-functional teams - marketing, engineering, production 
•	Flexible management system - enable innovation, experimentation, facilitate suggestions 
•	Review gates - each stage of product design (e.g. market analysis, concept definition, business case, prototype development, prototype testing, market validation, and production). 
 
18.	What production capacity adjustments can be done if demand differs from anticipated?  (p.441) 
•	If demand is higher - pay overtime, hire more employees, , add production shifts, back ordering, outsourcing to a supplier who can produce goods or offer services on a contractual basis 
•	If demand is lower - production shutdown, temporary lay-offs, stockpile inventories, offer production capacity to other organizations who are willing to outsource their production 
 
19.	Explain how the risks of process and plant layout designs can be mitigated.   (p.444) 
Careful planning is needed with production process and layout designs because the arrangements are difficult and costly to alter once they are implemented. Process and layout design risks can be mitigated by thoroughly defining requirements, modeling alternative layouts, analyzing the benefits of each model, benchmarking the preferred layout with other organizations, soliciting expert advice, and testing the layout with small production runs.  
20.	Explain the risks of job design and how to mitigate them.   (p.445) 
The main risk of production job design lies in managing the trade-offs between designs. Organizations must maintain a fine balance of productivity and low costs on one hand, while ensuring that their workforce is motivated and engaged on the other hand. An effective approach to mitigate job design risk is to automate repetitive production jobs to the best extent possible, while expanding employee jobs with tasks that machines cannot do. This strategy removes the disadvantages of job specialization, and leverages the advantages of job expansion for employees. 
 
21.	How is productivity risk best mitigated as part of master production scheduling?   (p.448) Master production scheduling finds the optimal solution to best achieve a combination of objectives, namely to minimize costs and completion time, maximize capacity utilization, minimize work-inprocess inventory, and minimize customer waiting times.  Linear programming is a good method for schedule optimization. (…) Organizations that overlook linear programming [in favor of simple rules for scheduling] are at risk of not operating their facilities as productively as their competitors do. Over a long period of time, the differences in productivity can be considerable. 
 
22.	What are the costs and consequences of poor quality in production, and how can the risks of poor quality be mitigated during production?   (p.450) 
The costs [and consequences] of poor quality include warranty claims, returned products, repairs, replacement units, lost sales and a damaged reputation. Legal liabilities may also be incurred if products do not perform as expected and cause damages or injuries. Mitigation techniques include: 
•	Prevention - through process design, training and supervision 
•	Detection - at each stage of production, including quality control before warehousing or shipment 
•	Continuous improvement - quality circles where employees discuss and resolve quality issues 
 
23.	What is productivity and what are examples of methods for improving productivity?  (p.451) 
•	Definition - Productivity is a measure of the ratio of outputs to inputs, which can be expressed in production units or costs. In other words, productivity is a measure of the number of products manufactured or services delivered in relation to the amount of resources consumed.  
•	Methods - Methods include obtaining better materials that facilitate production, training employees, reducing management levels, increasing automation, upgrading equipment, reducing energy consumption, recycling materials, eliminating waste, and streamlining processes. Lean production and just-in-time manufacturing are popular methods for increasing productivity. 
 
24.	What are the benefits and downsides of predictive maintenance?   (p.454) 
Benefits - performed only as needed, resulting in less downtime, less maintenance hours, less unnecessary replacement of parts, and more accurate predictions of failure.   Downsides - requires more sophisticated systems and ongoing monitoring.  
 
25.	What approach should be taken to decide on the proper approach for maintenance?   (p.454) Organizations need to analyze the costs, benefits and risks associated with each form of maintenance, for each type of machinery and equipment. The suppliers of machinery and equipment can provide guidance in finding optimal maintenance solutions. Consulting with experts, adopting maintenance plans, keeping spare parts on hand, training employees, tracking equipment failures, and maintaining a state of readiness to carry out urgent repairs are all good risk mitigation techniques. 
 
26.	How should risks associated with schedules be mitigated as part of fleet management.  (p.456) Management of schedules: 
•	Deadlines - schedule enough time for drivers to complete their routes without rushing. 
•	Rest periods - schedule rest periods and limit the hours of driving per regulations. 
•	Incentives - ensure that performance incentives do not cause drivers take risks such as  driving too fast or too many hours, and reward drivers for their safety record. 
 
27.	What is the difference between a business continuity plan and a disaster recover plan?   (p.457) 
•	Business continuity plan - outlines responsibilities, procedures and contingency arrangements for maintaining the continuity of operations and restoring normal operations. 
•	Disaster recovery plan - originates from information technology services and usually focuses on the continuity of computer systems. However, some disaster recovery plans cover other critical functions. In this case, they may be similar to business continuity plans. 
 
 
Multiple Choice Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Operations management is: 
a)	The management of corporate, core (line) and enabling (staff) functions. 
b)	The management of organizational processes and activities that create products. 
c)	The management of organizational systems, processes and activities that create products and services, and/or make them available to customers. 
d)	The management of employees and equipment to produce goods and services. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.422 
2. The core operational functions of operations management are: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Demand forecasting, capacity planning, location selection and aggregate planning. 
b)	Equipment maintenance, workplace safety, fleet management, business continuity. 
c)	Productivity, cost-effectiveness, reliability, safety and security. 
d)	Sourcing, production design, production execution, and distribution or delivery. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.422 
3. The five objectives of operations management are: 
a)	Performance, cost-effectiveness, reliability, safety and security. 
b)	Productivity, cost-effectiveness, profitability, reputation, and safety. 
c)	Strategy, alignment, performance management, risk management, and profitability. 
d)	Productivity, cost-effectiveness, reliability, safety and security. 
e)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.423 
4. The main purpose of operations management is: 
a)	To produce goods and services that are consistent with differentiation strategies. 
b)	To produce goods and services that can be sold at premium prices. 
c)	To produce goods and services that are consistent with the chosen market strategy. 
d)	To manufacture goods in a manner consistent with business and operational plans. 
e)	To meet production deadlines and quality targets for producing goods and services. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.423 
5. Indicators of productivity include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Cost of raw materials per unit of output 
b)	Percentage of production plan volume achieved 
c)	Amount of services delivered per labor hours 
d)	Total operating costs per week or month 
e)	Number of products made per plant, per month 
f)	Number of product defects per thousands 
g)	None of the above. 
h)	All of the above. 	c) 
e) 	p.423 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
6. Operational risks need to be managed very effectively because:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Operations are often conducted in foreign countries where oversight is absent. 
b)	Operational risks have a higher likelihood of occurrence than any other risks. 
c)	Operations represent a very large portion of organizational costs and small variations can have a huge impact on profitability or performance. 
d)	Operational risks relate to core business activities, and it can be hugely embarrassing to organizational reputation when risks materialize. e) None of the above. 
	f) 	All of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.424 
7. A good approach to identify sources of risks relating to operations management is to: 
a)	Analyze supply chains historically, and each component of production distinctly. 
b)	Analyze supply chains holistically, and each component of operations individually. 
c)	Analyze supply chains separately, and each component of production holistically. 
d)	Analyze supply chains carefully, and each component of operations separately. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.425 
8. A supply chain is: 
a)	A management framework for managing procurement and contracting activities. 
b)	A chain of activities that produces goods in a manufacturing complex. 
c)	A group of suppliers that provides goods and services to an organization. 
d)	A combination of organizations that collaborate in providing goods and services to customers. It includes suppliers, manufacturers, service providers and distributors. 
e)	An organization that is an original equipment manufacturer (OEM). f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.425 
9. Supply chain management is: 
a)	The planning and execution of procurement and contracting activities. 
b)	The management of suppliers to ensure that they deliver on their obligations. 
c)	The planning, creation and operation of a supply chain. 
d)	The management of an original equipment manufacturer (OEM). 
e)	The management of production activities in a manufacturing complex. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.425 
10. The four broad categories of supply chain risks are: 
a)	Sourcing, production design, production execution, and distribution. 
b)	Linkages with marketing, demand forecasting, demand-driven supply chains, and supplier relationships. 
c)	Customer demand anticipation, supply chain integration, supply chain resilience, and supplier ethics. 
d)	Supply chain integration, information systems, supply chain models, and demand forecasting systems. 
e)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.426 
11. Techniques for managing supply chain resilience include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Developing a demand-driven supply chain and forecasting system. 
b)	Modeling to identify supply chain vulnerabilities and taking action to address them. 
c)	Maintaining good relationships with suppliers and paying their invoices promptly. 
d)	Implementing an extended ERM framework applicable to supply chain participants. 
e)	Establishing an anti-corruption program to address corruption issues. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	b) 
d) 	p.429-430 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
12. Techniques for anticipating customer demand, or countering the challenges associated with anticipating customer demand include:   (select all that apply) a) Linkages with marketing and sales 
b)	Supplier relationship management 
c)	Demand-driven supply chains 
d)	Extended ERM framework 
e)	Shared information systems 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.426-427 
13. Extended enterprise risk management is: 
a)	A risk management approach that provides extended assurance. 
b)	A risk management process that is applied to the entire organization. 
c)	A risk management framework that covers suppliers and distributors. 
d)	A risk management process that extends to all subsidiaries and divisions. 
e)	A risk management framework that applies to all stakeholders. 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.430 
14. The purpose of extended enterprise risk management is to:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Respond to stakeholder expectations regarding risk management. 
b)	Design a risk management framework that is adopted by supply chain participants. 
c)	Provide assurance that supply chain risk management is applied extensively. 
d)	Monitor the risk management practices of participants in a supply chain. 
e)	Ensure that supply chain participants maintain the continuity of their operations, and that they act legally and ethically to protect the reputation of other participants. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 
e) 	p.430 
15. Key components of extended enterprise risk management include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Assessment of financial stability. 
b)	Review of business continuity arrangements. 
c)	Review of compliance and reputation. 
d)	Assessment of corporate governance. 
e)	Review of production quality and performance. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	f) 	p.430 
16. Internal sources of risks affecting supply chain resilience include:  
(select all that apply) 
a)	Supplier reliability and financial stability. 
b)	Contractual disputes with suppliers. 
c)	Geopolitical issues such as conflicts and wars. 
d)	Economic issues such as import tariffs, duties, taxes. 
e)	Acts of nature such as earthquakes and storms. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.428 
17. The objective(s) of sourcing are to:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Obtain goods and services that meet requirements. 
b)	Obtain goods and services at the right time. 
c)	Obtain goods and services at competitive prices. 
d)	Pay only for the goods and services actually received. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.431 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
18. The risks of sourcing include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Not properly defining requirements. 
b)	Soliciting or selecting too many suppliers. 
c)	Not negotiating advantageous terms. 
d)	Not paying suppliers on time. 
e)	Paying goods in advance of receiving them. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.431 
19. The activities of the sourcing process are: 
a)	Procurement planning, contracting and ordering, receiving and warehousing, performance and risk management. 
b)	Requirements definition, procurement planning, ordering, receiving, warehousing, payments, performance management. 
c)	Procurement planning, supplier selection, contracting and ordering, receiving and payments, performance monitoring. 
d)	Supplier solicitation, supplier selection, contracting, ordering, receiving, payment. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.432 
20. Sourcing strategies should be developed based on:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Sourcing risks and profitability impact. 
b)	Supply chain risks, cost of goods sold, profit margins, accounts payable. 
c)	Trivial items, competitive items, complex items, strategic items. 
d)	Procurement centralization, supplier certifications, available supply. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.433 
21. The main risk of supplier selection is: 
a)	Inability to solicit suppliers and pre-qualify or certify them as required. 
b)	Ineffective procurement decentralization resulting in maverick buying. 
c)	Inability to obtain products and services that meet requirements on a timely basis. 
d)	Ineffective contract negotiations leading to procurement process disputes. 
e)	Suppliers refusing to do business with the organization because of its reputation. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.433 
22. The risks associated with maverick buying are:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Goods and services not obtained on a timely basis or that do not meet requirements. 
b)	Lack of independence, transparency and controls in supplier selection, resulting in possible favoritism, excessive costs, corruption and fraud. 
c)	Paying too much for goods or services because an unconventional contract or payment process is used such as paying suppliers in advance of delivery. 
d)	Lack of procurement planning resulting in last minute orders and higher costs. e) None of the above 	b) 	p.433 
23. Practices for mitigating the risk of supplier selection include:  (select all that apply) a) Creation of supply categories. 
b)	Supplier pre-qualification and supplier certification. 
c)	Mechanism for decentralized procurement . 
d)	Approach for unanticipated requirements. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.434-435 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
24. Supplier certification is:   
a)	An ISO certification which attests that a supplier has good management practices. 
b)	An approach to pre-qualify suppliers by stating requirements, soliciting quotes or proposals, and evaluating submissions (bids) received against criteria. 
c)	An agreement where a supplier attests that they can meet contractual requirements. 
d)	A rigorous assessment or due diligence of supplier policies, practices, capabilities, reputation and past performance that provides assurance that a supplier is reliable. 
e)	A certificate of supply chain excellence issued by a professional association. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.434 
25. A contract should be issued for the procurement of goods or services when: 
a)	The legal department is the contracting authority for the procurement. 
b)	A purchase order is not accepted or confirmed by the selling organization. 
c)	The purchase order cannot be relied upon to create a legally binding agreement. 
d)	A purchase order is not sufficient to protect the interests of the buying organization. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.435 
26. Which of the following contracts transfer risks from the buyer to the seller? 
(select all that apply.) 
a)	Buy-back contract. 
b)	Revenue sharing contract. 
c)	Volume rebate contract. 
d)	Cost-plus contract. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.435 
27. Which of the following contracts transfer risks from the seller to the buyer? 
(select all that apply.) 
a)	Buy-back contract. 
b)	Revenue sharing contract. 
c)	Volume rebate contract. 
d)	Cost-plus contract. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.435 
28. Procurement contracts are particularly useful when?  (select all that apply) 
a)	The seller does not have an application for online purchasing. 
b)	A purchase order does not adequately protect the buyer or seller. 
c)	The buyer and seller have a complex relationship and want risks transferred. 
d)	A purchase order cannot be sent electronically to the seller. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 
c) 	p.435-436 
29. The role of contracting authority should be assigned to: 
a)	The purchasing department. 
b)	The organizational function of unit requesting the goods and services. 
c)	The senior executive in charge of managing contracts. 
d)	The legal services department. 
e)	The financial services department. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.436 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
30. Production design is: 
a)	The creation of product and service prototypes that meet customer needs and expectations, in a manner consistent with organizational strategies. 
b)	The planning and implementation of the working arrangements needed to produce organizational products and services. 
c)	The management of organizational systems, processes and activities that create products and services, and/or make them available to customers. 
d)	The activities done to plan, coordinate and operate a production system. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.438 
31. Approaches for mitigating the risks of product design include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Demand forecasting, capacity planning, and location selection. 
b)	Production process design, plant layout design, and production job design. 
c)	Cross-functional design teams (marketing, engineering, production) 
d)	Flexible management systems that encourage innovation, experimentation, etc. 
e)	Review gates applied to market analysis, concept definition, business case, prototype development, prototype testing, market validation, and production. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	c) 
d) 
e) 	p.439 
32. Methods for mitigating demand forecasting risks include:  (select all that apply) a) Flexible production systems. 
b)	Use of more than one forecasting method. 
c)	Use of quantitative forecasting techniques only. 
d)	Investing to develop the most accurate forecasts possible. 
e)	Monitoring of the accuracy of forecasts. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 
e) 	p.441 
33. A good approach for mitigating location selection risk is to: 
a)	Develop a business case to determine which location(s) should be selected. 
b)	Develop a risk profile to identify which locations have the greatest risks. 
c)	Identify and analyze key decision-making factors related to location selection,  and use a factor rating method to assess the desirability of each location. 
d)	Identify which customers prefer to buy online vs onsite. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.442 
34. Techniques for mitigating higher than anticipated demand include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Paying overtime and adding production shifts. 
b)	Back ordering products if customers are willing to wait. 
c)	Shutting down production to focus more effort on shipping. 
d)	Assembling a team to analyze why forecasts were inaccurate. 
e)	Hiking prices to reduce customer demand. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.441 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
35. Plant layout design risks are best mitigated by: 
a)	Planning and forecasting demand, selecting an appropriate location, modeling alternative layouts, pilot testing alternative layouts, and soliciting expert advice. 
b)	Defining production requirements, modeling alternative layouts, analyzing the benefits of each model, benchmarking the preferred layout with other organizations, soliciting expert advice, and testing the layout with small production runs. 
c)	Defining production requirements, pilot testing alternative layouts, analyzing productivity results, comparing layouts with similar organizations, soliciting advice from equipment manufacturers, and testing layouts with actual production. 
d)	Planning and forecasting demand, selecting an appropriate location, examining alternative production process designs, testing the designs, and analyzing results. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.444 
36. The main risk of production job design: 
a)	Relates to possible ineffective job enlargement and job rotation arrangements. 
b)	Involves making sure that employees accept their wages and working conditions. 
c)	Lies in managing the trade-offs between job specialization and job expansion. 
d)	Asking employees to specialize doing tasks that they may not be interested in. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.445 
37. Capacity management techniques for aggregate planning include: 
a)	Pricing, advertising, backorders, stockpiling and subcontracting. 
b)	Level scheduling strategies, chase level strategies, pull production strategies. 
c)	Master production scheduling and material requirements planning. 
d)	Working hours, staffing levels, production shifts, stockpiling and subcontracting. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.447 
38. Productivity risks associated with production scheduling are best mitigated: 
a)	By applying simple rules such as first come first served. 
b)	With safety stock that can be use to meet customer orders on an urgent basis. 
c)	Using linear programming models that help optimize production schedules. 
d)	By adopting plant layout designs that maximize production capacity. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.448 
39. Techniques that mitigate inventory management risks include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Classification - classify inventory according to relative importance and risks. 
b)	Cost analysis - determine the fixed costs, variable costs and breakeven point. 
c)	Safety stock - warehouse enough inventory to avoid production interruptions. 
d)	Pooling - grouping of inventories as materials, work in process and finished goods. 
e)	Tracking - monitor sales to customers and goods in transit. f) 	All of the above 
g) None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.449 
40. The costs and consequences of poor quality in production include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Warranty claims and returned products. 
b)	Product repairs and replacement units. 
c)	Lost sales and a damaged reputation. 
d)	Legal liabilities as a result of damages or injuries. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.451 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
41. Methods relevant for improving productivity in the context of production include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Obtaining better materials, training employees and reducing management levels. 
b)	Upgrading equipment, reducing energy consumption and increasing automation. 
c)	Streamlining processes, recycling materials and eliminating waste. 
d)	Lean production and just-in-time manufacturing. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.451 
42. The risks of distribution include: 
a)	Not making products and services available to end customers as effectively as competitors do, or incurring excessive distribution costs in doing so. 
b)	Favoring physical stores instead of the Internet, not having a good website or Internet strategy, and not having an effective social media presence. 
c)	Making products that are incompatible with what customers actually want. 
d)	Conflicts with distribution channel participants if direct distribution is used. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
d) 	p.453 
43. Approaches for mitigating the risks of distribution include: 
a)	Understanding customers and finding effective ways to reach them. 
b)	Carefully selecting channel partners and negotiating favorable terms with them. 
c)	Avoiding experimentation with various distribution channels. 
d)	Negotiating advantageous contracts with a limited number of distribution partners. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.453 
44. The risks of inadequate plant and equipment maintenance include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Unplanned interruptions 
b)	Shorter useful life of assets 
c)	Higher capital expenditures 
d)	Legal liabilities. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.454 
45. Predictive maintenance involves:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Waiting until a breakdown of failure occurs before taking action. 
b)	Routine inspections, and scheduled tune-ups and parts replacement.  
c)	Constant monitoring using sensors to evaluation equipment conditions. 
d)	Making forecasts to predict maintenance costs and equipment replacement costs. 
e)	Predicting when maintenance should be conducted based on historical data. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.454 
46. Examples of employer responsibilities relating to health and safety include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Providing protective clothing and equipment at no cost to employees. 
b)	Maintaining adequate ventilation, temperature, humidity, lighting, etc. 
c)	Performing tests to measure air quality, noise levels, water quality, etc. 
d)	Keeping accurate records of work-related accidents, injuries and illnesses. 
e)	Reporting work related accidents, injuries, hospitalizations and fatalities. 
f)	Informing employees of regulatory warnings, fines, and corrective actions. g) All of the above. 
h) None of the above. 	g) 	p.455 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
47. The following are risk mitigation techniques for health and safety: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Measuring the impact of workplace injuries or illnesses to determine their costs. 
b)	Establishing a health and safety program that meets regulatory requirements and assigning responsibility for the program to qualified employees. 
c)	Ensuring that work areas are monitored using motion sensors and cameras. 
d)	Developing a plan to determine how health and safety risks should be managed. 
e)	Communicating workplace accidents, injuries and illnesses on social media. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	b) 	p.455 
48. Fleet management is:   
a)	The management of shipping boats used for commerce. 
b)	The management of a fleet of navy warships for military operations. 
c)	The management of vehicles used to transport goods, animals or people. 
d)	The management of vehicles, trains, ships or aircrafts used to transport goods, animals or people. 
e)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.456 
49. The six components of a fleet management system are: 
a)	Vehicles, Drivers, Routes, Destinations, Schedules, Safety devices 
b)	Vehicles, Drivers, Cargoes, Schedules, Safety devices, Regulations 
c)	Vehicles, Drivers, Cargoes, Routes, Schedules, Safety devices 
d)	Vehicles, Drivers, Routes, Destinations, Schedules, Regulations 
e)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.456 
50. Risks associated with schedules in a fleet management system can be mitigated by: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Scheduling enough time for drivers to complete their routes without rushing. 
b)	Properly maintaining vehicles to prevent breakdown or accidents. 
c)	Ensuring that the vehicles used as suitable for the cargo being transported. 
d)	Installing scales that measure weight per axle to maintain proper load balance. 
e)	Ensuring that performance incentives do not cause drivers to drive too fast or too many hours, and rewarding drivers for their safety record. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 
e) 	p.456 
51. Business continuity management is: 
a)	Ensuring that organizations are financially viable to remain a going concern. 
b)	Filing for bankruptcy protection in the event that an organization is insolvent. 
c)	Planning and taking actions to prevent and react to events that threaten the continuity of operations, excluding networks and computer systems. 
d)	Planning and taking actions to prevent and react to interruptions affecting networks and computer systems, but not other production systems. 
e)	Planning and taking actions to prevent and react to events that threaten the continuity of operations, including networks and computer systems. f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.457-458 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
52. A disaster recovery plan is: 
a)	The same thing as a business continuity plan. 
b)	A plan to prevent or react to events that threaten the continuity of operations. 
c)	A plan that usually focuses on the continuity of computer systems. 
d)	A plan that prepares an organization to respond to public emergencies. e) None of the above. 
	f) 	All of the above. 	c) 	p.458 
53. The purpose of crisis management is to: 
a)	Respond to workplace safety and health issues satisfactorily. 
b)	Respond to business interruptions and restore activities to normal operations. 
c)	Respond to failures of networks and computer systems interrupting business. 
d)	Respond to emergency events that pose a threat to the general public. 
e)	Respond to situation where the reputation and brand of an organization is at risk. 
f)	Respond to management issues having gone viral on social media. g) None of the above. 	e) 	p.458 
54. The following are components of a crisis management plan:  (select all that apply) a) Defining what constitutes a crisis. 
b)	Establishing a protocol for activating crisis management. 
c)	Assigning roles and responsibilities for crisis management and communications. 
d)	Identifying suppliers and support groups that can supplement organizational capabilities, and negotiating arrangements for obtaining support on a short notice. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.459 
55. The following are advisable communication steps in the event of a crisis: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Do not involve senior officials with communications. 
b)	Communicate frequently and sincerely. 
c)	Explain what happened and outline possible causes. 
d)	Demonstrate a firm commitment to find the answers. 
e)	Offer a “no comment” response if pressed for information. 
f)	Take ownership of the problem without admitting guilt. 
g)	All of the above. 
h)	None of the above. 	b) 
f) 	p.460 
 
 
True or False Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Operations management is the management of organizational systems, processes and activities that create products and services, and/or make them available to customers. 	True 	p.422 
2. Operations management is the management of processes that create products. 	False 	p.422 
3. The core operational functions of operations management are sourcing, production design, production execution, and distribution or delivery. 	True 	p.422 
4. The core operational functions of operations management are demand forecasting, capacity planning, location selection and aggregate planning. 	False 	p.422 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
5. The five objectives of operations management are productivity, cost-effectiveness, reliability, safety and security. 	True 	p.423 
6. The five objectives of operations management are productivity, cost-effectiveness, profitability, reputation, and safety. 	False 	p.423 
7. The main purpose of operations management is to produce goods and services that are consistent with the chosen market strategy. 	True 	p.423 
8. The main purpose of operations management is to produce goods and services that are in demand and that can be sold at premium prices. 	False 	p.423 
9. Indicators of productivity include amount of services delivered per labor hours, and number of products made per plant, per month. 	True 	p.423 
10. Indicators of productivity include cost of raw materials per unit of output, and percentage of production plan volume achieved. 	False 	p.423 
11. Operational risks need to be managed effectively because operations represent a very large portion of organizational costs, and operational risks are damaging to reputation. 	True 	p.424 
12. Operational risks need to be managed effectively because operations are often conducted in foreign countries, and risks have a high likelihood of occurrence. 	False 	p.424 
13. A good approach to identify sources of risks relating to operations management is to analyze supply chains holistically, and each component of operations individually. 	True 	p.425 
14. A good approach to identify sources of risks relating to operations management is to analyze supply chains individually, and each component of production holistically. 	False 	p.425 
15. A supply chain is a combination of organizations that collaborate in providing goods and services to customers. It includes suppliers, manufacturers and distributors. 	True 	p.425 
16. A supply chain is a management framework for managing procurement activities. 	False 	p.425 
17. Supply chain management is the planning, creation and operation of a supply chain. 	True 	p.425 
18. Supply chain management is the management of activities in a manufacturing complex. 	False 	p.425 
19. The four broad supply chain risk categories are customer demand anticipation, supply chain integration, supply chain resilience, and supplier ethics. 	True 	p.426 
20. The four broad supply chain risk categories are linkages with marketing, demand forecasting, demand-driven supply chains, and supplier relationships. 	False 	p.426 
21. Techniques for managing supply chain resilience include implementing an extended ERM framework applicable to supply chain participants. 	True 	p.429-430 
22. Techniques for managing supply chain resilience include maintaining good relationships with suppliers and paying their invoices promptly. 	False 	p.429-430 
23. Techniques for anticipating customer demand, or countering the challenges associated with anticipating customer demand, include maintaining linkages with marketing and sales and implementing demand-driven supply chains. 	True 	p.426-427 
24. Extended enterprise risk management is a risk management framework that extends to  (covers) suppliers and distributors. 	True 	p.430 
25. Extended enterprise risk management is an enhanced risk management approach that provides extended assurance on the quality of risk management practices. 	False 	p.430 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
26. The purpose of extended enterprise risk management is to: 1) monitor the risk management practices of participants in a supply chain; 2) ensure that supply chain participants maintain the continuity of their operations; and 3) ensure that supply chain participants act legally and ethically to protect the reputation of other participants. 	True 	p.430 
27. The purpose of extended enterprise risk management is to: 1) design a risk management framework that is adopted by other supply chain participants; and  2) provide assurance that supply chain risk management is applied extensively. 	False 	p.430 
28. Key components of extended enterprise risk management include an assessment of corporate governance, financial stability, and business continuity arrangements. 	True 	p.430 
29. Key components of extended enterprise risk management include an assessment of market strategies, organizational alignment, and production activities. 	False 	p.430 
30. Internal sources of risks affecting supply chain resilience include supplier reliability and financial stability, contractual disputes, and theft or loss of inventory. 	True 	p.428 
31. Internal sources of risks affecting supply chain resilience include geopolitical issues such as conflicts and wars and acts of nature such as earthquakes and storms. 	False 	p.428 
32. The objectives of sourcing are to obtain goods and services that meet requirements, at the right time, at competitive prices, and to pay only for what is actually received. 	True 	p.431 
33. The objectives of sourcing are to forecast requirements, develop make of buy analyses, and develop procurement strategies based on sourcing risks and profitability impact. 	False 	p.431 
34. The objectives of sourcing are to forecast requirements, negotiate contracts, issue purchase orders, confirm the receipt of goods or service, and pay suppliers on time. 	False 	p.431 
35. The risks of sourcing include not properly defining requirements, not soliciting or selecting the right suppliers, not negotiating advantageous terms, not getting what is needed at the right time, and paying for more than what has actually been received. 	True 	p.431 
36. The risks of sourcing include not properly defining requirements, soliciting or selecting too many suppliers, not paying suppliers on time, and losing inventory due to theft. 	False 	p.431 
37. A good model for developing sourcing strategies involves a matrix that considers sourcing risks and profitability impacts, and categorizes goods and services as either trivial items, competitive items, complex items, and strategic items. 	True 	p.433 
38. A good model for developing sourcing strategies involves a matrix that considers supplier risks and production impacts, and categorizes goods and services as either trivial items, costly items, complex items, and high risk items. 	False 	p.433 
39. The main risk of supplier selection is the inability to obtain products and services that meet requirements on a timely basis. 	True 	p.433 
40. The main risk of supplier selection is the inability to solicit suppliers and pre-qualify or certify them as required. 	False 	p.433 
41. Maverick buying is a situation where organizational units buy directly from whatever suppliers they choose, without having a coordinated approach with other units. 	True 	p.433 
42. Maverick buying is a situation where there is a lack of procurement planning resulting in too many last minute orders and higher costs for goods and services. 	False 	p.433 
43. The risks of maverick buying are a lack of independence, transparency and controls in supplier selection, resulting in possible favoritism, excessive costs, corruption and fraud. 	True 	p.433 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
44. The risks of maverick buying are goods and services not obtained on a timely basis,  or that do not meet requirements, or that may be defective or too expensive. 	False 	p.433 
45. Practices for mitigating the risk of supplier selection include the creation of supply categories, supplier pre-qualification, supplier certification, mechanisms for decentralized procurement, and approach for unanticipated requirements. 	True 	p.434-435 
46. Practices for mitigating the risk of supplier selection include the creation of supply arrangements, supplier pre-qualification or certification, mechanisms for centralizing procurement, and an approach for unanticipated supplier risk events. 	False 	p.434-435 
47. A supplier certification is a rigorous assessment or due diligence of supplier policies, practices, capabilities, reputation and past performance that provides assurance that a supplier is very reliable and capable of meeting or exceeding requirements. 	True 	p.434 
48. A supplier certification is an approach to pre-authorize suppliers by stating requirements, soliciting quotes or proposals, and evaluating submissions (bids) received against criteria in order to verify that the supplier provides value for money. 	False 	p.434 
49. A contract should be issued for the procurement of good and services when a purchase order is not sufficient to protect the interests of the buying organization. 	True 	p.435 
50. Contracts that transfer risks from the buyer to the seller include buy-back contracts, quantity flexibility contracts and revenue sharing contracts. 	True 	p.435 
51. Contracts that transfer risks from the buyer to the seller include volume-rebate contracts and cost-plus contracts. 	False 	p.435 
52. The role of contracting authority should be assigned to the purchasing department. 	True 	p.435 
53. The role of contracting authority should be assigned to legal services. 	False 	p.435 
54. Production design is the planning and implementation of the working arrangements needed to produce organizational products and services. 	True 	p.438 
55. Production design is the creation of product and service prototypes that meet customer needs and expectations, in a manner consistent with organizational strategies. 	False 	p.438 
56. Product design risk mitigation techniques include with cross-functional design teams, flexible management systems, and review gates applied to each phase of design. 	True 	p.439 
57. Product design risks are mitigated through demand forecasting, capacity planning, location selection, process design, plant layout design and production job design. 	False 	p.438 
58. Methods for mitigating demand forecasting risks include flexible production systems, using more than one forecasting method, and monitoring the accuracy of forecasts. 	True 	p.441 
59. Methods for mitigating demand forecasting risks include using quantitative forecasting techniques only, and investing to develop the most accurate forecasts possible. 	False 	p.441 
60. A good approach for mitigating location selection risk is to identify and analyze key decision-making factors, and use a factor rating method to assess each location. 	True 	p.442 
61. A good approach for mitigating location selection risk is to develop a risk profile to determine the strategic, operational and financial risks affection the selection process. 	False 	p.442 
62. Techniques for mitigating higher than anticipated demand include paying overtime, hiring employees, adding production shifts and backordering products. 	True 	p.441 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
63. Plant layout design risks are best mitigated by planning and forecasting demand, selecting an appropriate location, and analyzing alternative production process designs. 	False 	p.444 
64. The main risk of production job design lies in managing the trade-offs between job designs, namely job specialization versus job expansion. 	True 	p.445 
65. Capacity management techniques for aggregate planning include working hours, staffing levels, production shifts, stockpiling and subcontracting. 	True 	p.447 
66. Capacity management techniques for aggregate planning include master production scheduling, material requirements planning and finished products distribution plans. 	False 	p.447 
67. Productivity risks associated with production scheduling are best mitigated by applying simple rules such as first come first served and earliest due date first. 	False 	p.448 
68. Productivity risks associated with production scheduling are best mitigated using linear programming models that help optimize production schedules. 	True 	p.448 
69. Techniques that mitigate inventory management risks include classification, cost analysis, ordering models, safety stock, pooling, storage, security and tracking. 	True 	p.449 
70. Techniques that mitigate inventory management risks include demand forecasting, capacity planning, production process design, and plant layout design. 	False 	p.449 
71. The costs and consequences of poor quality may include legal liabilities. 	True 	p.451 
72. Methods relevant for improving productivity include streamlining processes, upgrading equipment, training employees, and reducing management levels. 	True 	p.451 
73. Methods relevant for improving productivity include customer satisfaction surveys, product cost analyses, supply chain outsourcing, and compliance to regulations. 	False 	p.451 
74. The risks of distribution include not making products and services available to end customers as effectively as competitors do, or incurring excessive costs in doing so. 	True 	p.453 
75. The risks of distribution include making products that are incompatible with what customers actually want, and favoring physical stores instead of the Internet. 	False 	p.453 
76. Approaches for mitigating the risks of distribution include understanding customers and finding effective ways to reach them, carefully selecting channel partners and negotiating favorable terms with them, and experimenting with various channels. 	True 	p.453 
77. Approaches for mitigating the risks of distribution include avoiding unnecessary experimentation with various distribution channels, and negotiating advantageous contracts with a limited number of distribution partners. 	False 	p.453 
78. The three choices that organizations have regarding plant and equipment maintenance are reactive maintenance, preventive maintenance and predictive maintenance. 	True 	p.454 
79. The three choices that organizations have regarding plant and equipment maintenance are inspection maintenance, supplier maintenance, and statistical maintenance. 	False 	p.454 
80. Preventive maintenance is a planned approach that involves routine inspections, and scheduled tune-ups, and scheduled parts replacement to prevent downtime. 	True 	p.454 
81. Preventive maintenance results in less downtime, less maintenance hours, and less unnecessary parts replacement than predictive maintenance. 	False 	p.454 
82. Employers are responsible to report work-related accidents and injuries to regulators and must inform employees of regulatory warnings, fines and corrective actions. 	True 	p.455 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
83. Employees have the right to refuse to work if they believe that their working conditions are unsafe. Employers are prohibited to take retaliatory actions against such employees. 	True 	p.455 
84. Workers compensation insurance indemnifies employees and their families in the  event of work-related injuries or fatalities. In return for the indemnification, employees generally cannot take legal action against their employer. 	True 	p.455 
85. Workers compensation insurance is a program that compensates employees in the event that they are laid-off or dismissed, and no longer employed. 	False 	p.455 
86. Fleet management applies to all types of vehicles, including automobiles, trucks, buses, trains, ships and aircrafts. 	True 	p.456 
87. Fleet management only applies to roadway vehicles such as automobiles and trucks. 	False 	p.456 
88. The six components of a fleet management system are vehicles, drivers, cargoes, routes, schedules and safety devices. 	True 	p.456 
89. The six components of a fleet management system are vehicles, drivers, routes, destinations, schedules, and regulations. 	False 	p.456 
90. Risks associated with schedules in a fleet management system can be mitigated  by scheduling enough time for drivers to complete their routes without rushing, scheduling rest periods, and limiting the number of hours driven. 	True 	p.456 
91. Risks associated with schedules in a fleet management system can be mitigated  by properly maintaining vehicles to prevent breakdown or accidents, and ensuring  that the vehicles used as suitable for the cargo being transported. 	False  	p.456 
92. In the context of fleet management, whether vehicles are owned or leased does not make a difference with respect to regulatory obligations applicable to safety. 	True 	p.456 
93. Business continuity management is planning and taking actions to prevent and react to events that threaten the continuity of operations. 	True 	p.457 
94. Business continuity management is planning and taking actions to prevent and react to interruptions affecting networks and computer systems. 	False 	p.457 
95. A business continuity plan includes determining how long an interruption is tolerable, and how much time is acceptable for restoring normal operations. 	True 	p.457 
96. A business continuity plan involves making sure that no business interruptions are possible and that operations can be maintained at all times for all management systems. 	False 	p.457 
97. Most organizations have a business continuity plan. 	False 	p.458 
98. A business continuity plan excludes considerations related to information technology. 	False 	p.458 
99. In the context of a government entity, a business continuity plan is the same thing as an emergency preparedness plan. 	False 	p.458 
100. A crisis is an unexpected event that can severely harm the reputation and brand of an organization if it is not managed promptly and effectively. 	True 	p.458 
101. The purpose of crisis management is to respond to situation where the reputation and brand of an organization is at risk. 	True 	p.458 
102. The purpose of crisis management is to respond to business interruptions and restore activities to normal operations. 	False 	p.458 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
103. A crisis management plan includes identifying suppliers and support groups that can supplement organizational capabilities in the event of a crisis. 	True 	p.459 
104. A crisis management plan includes identifying suppliers and support groups that can take ownership and manage various types of crises on behalf of the organization. 	False 	p.459 
105. Advisable communication steps in the event of a crisis include communicating frequently and sincerely, and taking ownership of a problem without admitting guilt. 	True 	p.460 
106. Advisable communication steps in the event of a crisis include not involving senior officials with communications, and offering “no comment” responses to questions. 	False 	p.460 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 10  
Marketing and Sales Risks 
 
 
Review Questions 
 
 
1. Marketing and sales 
 
a)	What is marketing?   (p.470) 
Marketing is creating, communicating, distributing and selling products and services that respond to customer needs, wants and expectations, in a manner consistent with organizational goals, strategies and objectives. Marketing includes managing customer relationships in ways that benefit an organization and its stakeholders.  As such, sales is a subcomponent of marketing. 
 
b)	Explain how marketing applies to every type of organization.   (p.470) 
It is important to realize that marketing applies to every type of organization. Because the purpose of any organization is to offer at least one good or service, every organization must find ways to make its offering known and appealing. (…) Every organization has a purpose and relies on marketing to create, communicate, and distribute or deliver products and services that respond to customer needs in ways that meet organizational goals, strategies and objectives. 
 
c)	What are marketing risks?   (p.470-471, p.475) 
Consider the purpose and objectives of marketing in order to identify the risks: 
•	Inability to effectively communicate products and services (customer awareness) 
•	Inability to offer goods or services that appeal to customers (product / brand appeal) 
•	Inability to offer goods or services that provide superior value (competitiveness) 
•	Ineffective distribution channels (wholesalers, distributors, retailers, direct) 
•	Spending too much or too little on marketing initiatives (sub-optimal risk-reward) 
Marketing risks may be defined as the risks of not having a sound market strategy, and not having effective and integrated marketing strategies and approaches that support the market strategy, resulting in lost revenues and lower profitability (or lower performance and results. 
 
 
2. Marketing mix 
 
a)	What are the four components of the marketing mix?   (p.472) 
•	Product and service 
•	Price 
•	Place 
•	Promotion 
 
b)	Explain one of the four components and the main risk associated with it.   (p.472-473) 
Product and service 
•	Description - design, branding, packaging, warranty, customer support. 
•	Risk - may not appeal to customers, resulting in lack of demand, lost revenues, lower profits 
Price 
•	Description - list price, discounts, rebates, credit terms, pay per use 
•	Risk - setting a price too high or too low, resulting in sub-optimal revenues and profits 
Place 
•	Description - locations, distribution channels, warehousing, order fulfillment, delivery 
•	Risk - not adequately facilitating customer buying (lost sales and lower revenue), or incurring excessive costs doing so (lower profitability or higher customer prices) 
Promotion 
•	Description - advertising, sales promotion, direct marketing, digital marketing, personal selling 
•	Risk - not communicating and reaching out to customers effectively, or incurring excessive costs doing so, resulting in lack of awareness, lost revenue, or lower profitability 
 
3. Marketing function roles and responsibilities 
 
a)	Explain the general malaise regarding CMOs and marketing functions.   (p.474-475) Eighty percent of CEOs are dissatisfied with their CMO. 
CMOs have the highest turnover rate among senior executives. 
There is confusion and lack of uniform expectations about that what a CMO does. The nature and scope of CMO responsibilities is often not clear. 
 
b)	What approaches can be used to address the malaise?   (p.474-475) 
•	Clarify marketing roles and responsibilities with CMO candidates during hiring process. 
•	Solicit the views of candidates on their roles and responsibilities to see if they are a good fit. 
•	Discover the expectations and motivations of CMO candidates to see if they are a good fit. 
•	Outline how marketing success is defined and how performance will be measured. 
•	Outlines marketing roles, responsibilities, authorities and accountabilities in letters of offer. 
 
4. Marketing integration 
 
a)	Why is it important to integrate marketing with other functions?   (p.475) 
•	Without good coordination and integration of marketing activities misalignment risks materialize, and marketing becomes inconsistent, confused and much less effective. As a result, customers disengage, demand declines, and organizations underperform. 
•	Because it is a core function, marketing has linkages with virtually every organizational function. These functions include strategy, research and development, operations management, information technology, finance and legal services. Integration is essential. 
 
b)	Describe integration requirements between marketing and two other functions.   (p.476) Student may provide two of the following examples: 
•	Executive management - define roles and responsibilities, ensure proper alignment 
•	Sales - share information about customers to help marketing-mix decisions 
•	Strategy - work collaboratively, ensure market strategies consistent with market-mix activities 
•	Research and development - solicit input, convert inventions into useful innovations 
•	Information technology - support with digital marketing strategies, data analytics, etc. 
•	Finance and accounting - provide costing info, pricing insights, profitability analyses, etc. 
•	Legal services - provide info on laws and regulations applicable to products and services 
 
c)	Explain two sources of risk affecting marketing integration.   (p.476-477) Students may choose from the following:  
•	Dysfunctional cultures – Cultures that are competitive, arrogant or adversarial, result in limited trust, information sharing and collaboration across functions. 
•	Competing goals and priorities – Organizational units may have divided loyalties because their individual goals and priorities are misaligned with organizational goals and priorities.  
•	Unclear allocation of roles and responsibilities – Duplication or gaps in the allocation of roles and responsibilities may result in intergroup conflict or missed opportunities. 
•	Formal education and language barriers – Management functions are often unable to work effectively together because they do not understand each other (i.e. jargon, education, etc.). 
•	Inconsistent performance metrics – Functions and units may have their performance assessed in ways that distort their behaviors, away from achieving common goals. 
 
5. Marketing performance 
 
a)	Explain the expectations gap regarding marketing performance.   (p.477) 
Close to three out of four chief executive officers agree that “marketers are always asking for more money, but can rarely explain how much incremental business this money will generate. Marketers find it more and more difficult to demonstrate the value that marketing creates, even though there is more marketing data and better tools available for doing so. By extension, senior management and other stakeholders have greater expectations for marketers to demonstrate the value of marketing, given the abundance of data and the measurement tools available. 
 
b)	Briefly outline the marketing performance management system.   (p.478) 

 	
1) Define what marketing success looks like in 
relation to market strategies
	 

4) Report marketing performance using a marketing dashboard
	
Measure and Report Marketing Performance
	
2) Translate the definitions of marketing success into measurable indicators

 	
3) Measure the effects of marketing activities using marketing-mix modeling
	 

 
6. Marketing research 
 
a)	What is marketing research?   (p.480) 
Marketing research is the process of systematically collecting and analyzing market, customer and competitor data to inform marketing decisions. 
 
b)	Explain how marketing research mitigates marketing risks.   (p.480) 
Marketing research reduces uncertainty by providing insights on customer needs and market intelligence on the actions of competitors. It helps organizations understand customers, develop or update strategies, monitor competitors, and respond quickly to competitive threats and opportunities.  Organizations that fail to conduct good market research risk alienating their customers, not anticipating market developments, and losing their competitive edge. 
 
c)	What are the steps of the research process?   (p.481-482) 
•	Define the problem - articulate what the research is trying to solve or validate • Develop the plan - sources of data, research instruments, collection methods,  etc. 
•	Collect the data - carry out the data collection based on the research plan 
•	Perform the analysis - convert data to useful information that provides insights 
•	Report the findings - written report, presentations - data, analyses, conclusions 
 
d)	Why is a research policy important?   (p.482) 
Marketing research must be conducted legally and ethically. Otherwise, organizational reputation may be severely impacted, and lawsuits filed by regulators and other stakeholders. The temptation to cross the line between what is acceptable versus unlawful or unethical can be very enticing, especially when competitive pressures and financial rewards such as bonuses, commissions, or higher share prices are at stake. Senior executives must remain vigilant, and avoid creating a culture and conditions that motivate researchers to break the law or act unethically to improve market intelligence. Organizations need a policy on marketing research. The policy should outline acceptable practices, and those that are unlawful or deemed unethical. 
 
7. Marketing strategies and plans 
 
a)	Illustrate the market and marketing strategies continuum.   (p.484) 
Marketing Strategies
Market Strategies
Competitive advantageMarketing orientations	Marketing-mix decisions
-	Low-cost- Segmentation- Products and services
-	Differentiation- Targeting- Pricing
Market coverage- Positioning- Place / distribution
-	Broad	- Profiling	- Promotion
-	Focused
 
b)	What are the main risks of marketing strategies?   (p.485) 
The main risks of marketing strategies are inconsistencies with market strategies, and ineffective or conflicting marketing orientations and marketing-mix decisions. These risks can originate from multiple sources, including lack of leadership, managerial incompetence, lack of resources, limited integration across units, and inability to execute marketing strategies effectively. 
 
c)	How can the risks of marketing strategies be mitigated?   (p.485) The risks of marketing strategies can be mitigated by:  
•	Appointing a competent chief marketing officer that provides marketing leadership 
•	Defining responsibilities for developing and implementing marketing strategies 
•	Adopting integration mechanisms that create organizational alignment for marketing 
•	Allocating appropriate resources for impactful marketing activities and initiatives 
•	Developing a marketing plan that clearly outlines marketing directions and decisions 
•	Communicating the plan and monitoring its execution on an ongoing basis 
 
8. Marketing orientations 
 
a)	What is the difference between a product and a market orientation?   (p.485) 
•	Product orientation - Some organizations continuously develop innovative products and test the market demand for new products after they have been developed. 
•	Market orientation - Some organizations conduct extensive market research to identify unmet customer needs before attempting to develop new products. 
 
b)	What are the risks of product and market orientations?   (p.485) 
•	Product orientation risks - Customers may not necessarily buy the products, and demand may disappoint. Research and development losses may occur. 
•	Market orientation risk - A focus on existing customers may not help generate innovative products. Opportunities to disrupt may be overlooked. 
 
c)	What is the difference between transactional and relational strategies?   (p.486) 
•	Transactional strategy - views customer sales as single events or individual transactions. 
•	Relational strategy - manages customer relationships for ongoing or repeat business. 
 
 
d)	What are the risks of transactional and relational strategies?   (p.486) 
•	Transactional strategy risks - Not nurturing customer relationships may negatively affect reputation and long-term profitability. 
•	Relational strategy risks - Some customer relationships may be time consuming and not 
necessarily profitable. 
 
9. Segmentation 
 
a)	What is market segmentation?   (p.487) 
Market segmentation is the process of dividing a market into distinct groups of customers who respond similarly to marketing strategies.  These groups of customers are known as market segments. The purpose is to determine which segments should be targeted and how.  
 
b)	How does market segmentation complement market strategies?   (p.487) 
Segmentation helps organizations revisit their market strategies. For instance, an organization may discover that one of its market segments is not profitable and may wish to narrow its market coverage. By contrast, an organization may wish to broaden its coverage if it discovers that a previously ignored market segment presents a good opportunity. An organization may also decide to differentiate a product or service to better meet the needs of various segments. The relationship between market strategies and market segmentation is therefore dynamic. Market strategies should be supported with market segmentation for greater marketing effectiveness. In turn, market segmentation helps revisit the soundness of market strategies. 
 
c)	Outline the four types of consumer market segmentation and their risks.   (p.487) 
Geographic 	Segmentation by continent, region, country, state or province, etc. 
Risk – Does not consider consumer differences within geographies. 
Demographic 	Segmentation by customer age, gender, ethnicity, education level, income level, occupation, religion, family size, or other demographic attributes. 
Risk – Marketing based on such attributes may be perceived negatively. 
Psychographic 	Segmentation based on lifestyle attributes such as preferences, interests, etc. Risk – Makes the segmentation complex and time consuming. 
Product use 	Based on why products and services are bought, and how they are used. Risk – May not help discover new types of consumers. 
 
10. Positioning 
 
a)	What is market positioning?   (p.488-489) 
Market positioning is creating a clear and distinct perception of organizational products and services in the minds of customers, based on what an organization wants its products and services to represent relative to those of competitors. It is achieved by selecting and applying marketing-mix strategies that influence the perceptions of target customers. 
 
b)	What are the four types of market positioning strategies?   (p.489) 
•	Value for money - emphasizes high product or service quality relative to the price paid. 
•	Product or service attribute - focuses on attributes that are important for target groups. 
•	Customer benefits - emphasizes the meaning and satisfaction obtained. 
•	Competitive ability - focuses on the ability to go above and beyond what competitors do. 
 
c)	What are the risks of each type of market positioning strategy?   (p.489) 
•	Value for money - low prices and high quality typically result in narrower profit margins. 
•	Product or service attribute - some attributes may appeal to a narrow market segment. 
•	Customer benefits - may create negative perceptions by other groups of customers. 
•	Competitive ability - results in additional costs that competitors do not have. 
11. Profiling 
 
a.	What is profiling?   (p.490) 
Profiling is the analysis of selected market segments to develop a solid understanding of target customer groups. It starts with clarifying who are the primary and secondary customers within segments. It is followed by analyzing customer behaviors, identifying what they value, and understanding the kind of experience they are looking for. Profiling should include an analysis of the path to purchase, and the main touch-points where decisions can be influenced. 
 
b.	Briefly describe each step for profiling.   (p.490-493) 
•	Identifying primary customers - Primary customers are the ones that unlock the most value for the organization, they are not necessarily the actual purchaser of the products or services. Rather, they are the key individuals that are most influential in purchase decisions. 
•	Understanding behaviors and value drivers - Analyzing what primary and secondary customers value the most in a product or service, and delivering on these attributes. 
•	Defining the customer experience - Analyzing the customer journey, namely what the purchasing experience looks like from a customer perspective. Making the customer journey satisfying from beginning to end (providing information all the way to after sales service). 
•	Decoding the path to purchase - The path to purchase is the various steps that customers go through [internally] when making a purchase. The purpose is to understand who are the key players at each critical points (touchpoints) and how to influence decisions along the way. 
 
12. Marketing plans 
 
a.	What is a marketing plan?   (p.493) 
A	marketing plan is a written document that outlines marketing strategies and activities. It is normally developed as an extension of the strategic plan. (…) The purpose of a marketing plan is to outline the approach to market for each target customer segment.  
 
b.	What are the characteristics of a good marketing plan?   (p.493) 
A	good marketing plan reaffirms the soundness of market strategies, describes the marketing orientations, and details the marketing-mix decisions and activities by target segment, and by product or service. Most marketing plans cover one year, and may be five to fifty pages in length. 
 
c.	What are common shortcomings of marketing plans?   (p.494) 
According to marketing executives, marketing plans are often overly optimistic, contain insufficient competitive analysis, and are too focused on the short-term. 
 
13. Branding 
 
a)	What is the purpose of branding?   (p.494) 
The purpose of branding is to distinguish products and services from those of competitors, and make them recognizable by customers. Successful branding convinces customers that a product or service has meaningful differences with other products and services in its category. (…)  A brand is strong when customers insist on it and prefer not to buy competing brands as replacement. Strong brands offer many benefits that mitigate marketing and financial risks. 
 
b)	How can organizations manage their portfolio of brands?   (p.496) 
•	Having a  clear policy and a defined process for managing declining brands. 
•	Establishing a brand review committee with cross-functional representation to decide if declining brands are worth maintaining, which brands require more investment, etc. 
•	Analyzing brands using a recognized framework such as the Growth Share Matrix. 
 
c)	How can organizations mitigate the risks of counterfeit products?   (p.498) 
•	Monitor distribution channels, retail stores and the Internet to detect counterfeits. 
•	Soliciting legal advice, hiring private investigators, and issuing cease and desist letters. 
•	Reporting counterfeiters to law enforcement agencies. 
•	Taking legal action to seize counterfeit assets and obtain financial compensation. 
 
14. Pricing 
 
a)	What is the main risk of pricing?   (p.499) 
The main risk of pricing is to set a price too high or too low in relation to the value perceived by customers. In both cases, revenues and profits will be lower than what they could be, due to a lesser demand (price too high), or a missed opportunity to receive more money (price too low). 
 
b)	What challenges are frequently encountered with pricing?   (p.500) 
A survey (…) reveals that more than half of large companies do not have a well-defined pricing strategy. Even when they do have a strategy, it is often misaligned with organizational goals.  Other common issues identified in the survey include lack of pricing expertise, limited pricing analytics, and lack of pricing results monitoring. Additional challenges frequently encountered with pricing include the lack of reliable or easily accessible information, unclear roles and responsibilities, and inconsistent policies across business units. 
 
c)	Describe three pricing methods and their challenges and risks.   (p.501) 
Cost-based pricing: 
•	Description - Cost per unit with a markup for profit. 
•	Challenge - Allocation of fixed costs is complex and arbitrary. 
•	Risk - Ignores external factors such as customer value perceptions. 
Competitive pricing: 
•	Description - based on competitor prices and differences with competitor products. 
•	Challenge - may for an organization to renege on its market strategies to match prices. 
•	Risk - lowering or matching prices squeeze profit margins and may lead to price wars. 
Value-based pricing: 
•	Description - price based on customer perception of value and willingness to pay. 
•	Challenge - requires extensive market research to analyze customer perceptions. 
•	Risk - perceptions of value are subjective, heterogenous, and subject to change. For other methods, refer to textbook p.501. 
 
15. Distribution channels 
 
a)	What is an omnichannel strategy?   (p.502, p.503) 
•	An omnichannel strategy is the use multiple channels such as websites, smartphone applications, social media, telephone ordering, and in-store shopping. 
•	Effective omnichannel strategies provide a seamless multichannel experience where customers can shop, gather information, compare products, and purchase items the way that they prefer. Customers can switch between channels at their convenience. 
 
b)	What are the risks of omnichannel strategies and how should they be mitigated?   (p.503) 
The main risks with omnichannel strategies are the lack of integration between channels, and the costs of maintaining multiple channels. 
The risks of distribution can be mitigated by using a structured approach for distribution channel design and implementation. The following steps should be followed: 
•	Analyze how customers value buying from one distribution channel or another. 
•	Define distribution channel objectives based on how customers typically use them. 
•	Determine where intermediaries are needed to make distribution channels work. 
•	Identify intermediaries that are compatible with organizational goals and strategies. 
•	Negotiate fair arrangements with distribution intermediaries to avoid conflicts. 
•	Define performance metrics that are consistent with distribution channel objectives. 
•	Monitor the performance of distribution channels in achieving their objectives. 
•	Modify distribution channels design and arrangements when appropriate. 
 
16. Promotional mix 
 
a)	What is promotion?   (p.504) 
Promotion is the combination of approaches for communicating products and services, and influencing customer purchase decisions. The purposes of promotion include creating an awareness of products and services, informing customers, reminding them of products and services, and persuading them to make a purchase. 
 
b)	What are the differences between sales promotion and personal selling?   (p.504) 
•	Sales promotion - Offering temporary incentives to encourage the purchase of products and services. For consumer products and services, sales promotion methods include coupons, rebates, contests, free samples, product bundling, demonstrations, etc. For industrial products and services, methods include trade shows, discounts, allowances, free extras, etc. 
•	Personal selling - Personal selling is the work done by salespersons. It includes searching for customers, allocating time to existing or prospective customers, providing information about products and services, answering questions, and negotiating and closing sales. Personal selling is mostly used for B2B transactions, but it also applies to some B2C transactions where consumers need assistance, such as buying homes, automobiles and insurance. 
 
c)	What are the main risks of promotion?   (p.505) 
•	Main risks - not communicating and reaching out to customers effectively, or incurring excessive costs in doing so, resulting in a lack of awareness, lost revenue, or lower profitability.  
•	Sources of risk - not recognizing disruptive trends and technologies affecting promotion methods, not choosing the right promotional mix to reach target customers, not using promotional methods effectively, not setting the right expectations, delivering inconsistent messages, and not adequately measuring the performance of methods. 
 
d)	How can the risks and sources of risk of promotion be mitigated?   (p.506) 
The risks (and sources of risk) of promotion can be mitigated by planning promotional activities using a structured and integrated approach. The following steps can be applied for developing an integrated promotion plan:  
•	Clarify the target audience - who is targeted and why? 
•	Define the purpose of the promotion - what are the outcomes sought? 
•	Determine how success should be defined and measured - what are the indicators? 
•	Establish the budget - what are the resources available and how should we use them? 
•	Develop the message - what do we want to communicate and offer? 
•	Select the method(s) - which promotional method(s) should we use and why? 
•	Determine the approach - what is the best approach to carry out the method? 
•	Decide how to measure the promotion results - how will we measure results? 
 
17. Sales 
 
a)	What is the main risk of sales?   (p.506) 
The main risk of sales is not appropriately influencing buying decisions, or incurring excessive costs in doing so, resulting in lost sales, lower revenues, or lower profitability as the case may be.  
 
b)	Briefly describe customer relationship management.   (p.506) 
Customer relationship management (CRM) is a marketing strategy and process that focus on managing interactions with existing and prospective customers. It involves accumulating information about customers, analyzing their specific context and needs, and determining the best approach for making sales. The information accumulated includes prior purchases, key contacts, prior requests for information, prior meetings, preferred buying methods, procurement needs, financial situation, anticipated purchases, etc. The purpose of CRM is to increase the amount of sales, improve customer retention and loyalty, and strengthen business relationships. 
 
c)	Why is it important to manage customer relationships effectively?   (p.508) 
Attracting a new customer can cost as much as five times more than keeping an existing one.  Managing customer relationships is therefore a wise marketing strategy and investment. 
 
d)	What are unprofitable customers and how can they be managed?   (p.508-509) 
Not every customer offers the same opportunity for sales, especially in the context of B2B markets. In fact, every company loses money on some of its customers.  Organizations need to determine which customers are profitable, which ones have potential, and where business relationships should be terminated. (…) Organizations must avoid growing the accounts of unprofitable (problem) customers. They must find ways to graciously end business relationships, or apply tactics that curb undesirable behaviors. For example, some retailers refuse to sell merchandise online to customers with a history of returning too many products. 
 
 
Other Short Answer Questions 
 
1.	What are the two branches of marketing?  (p.470-471) 
Marketing has two main branches, namely business-to-business (B2B) marketing (industrial good and services), and business-to-consumer (B2C) marketing (consumer products and services). 
 
2.	What are the benefits and downsides for a manufacturer to sell directly to end customers?   (p.471) 
•	Possible to increase profitability to avoid intermediaries by selling to end customers. 
•	May alienate wholesalers, distributors or retailers if selling to end customers. 
•	Not viable (too costly) if products sold in small quantities to a multitude of end customers. 
 
3.	Describe price as a component of the marketing mix, and the risks associated with pricing.  (p.472) 
•	Description - Organizations must decide what to charge customers for their products and services. In some cases, products or services may be offered free if they generate other revenue streams. 
•	Risks - Set a price too high or too low in relation to the value perceived by customers. In both cases, revenues and profits will be lower than what they could be. Need to find the optimal price that will help achieve their goals, strategies and objectives. 
 
4.	Describe promotion as a component of the marketing mix, and the risks associated with promotion.  (p.472) 
•	Description - Communicate the offering through advertising using media such as television, radio, newspapers, magazines, websites, smartphones, etc. Promote by doing presentations, demonstrations, providing free samples, sending information by mail, personal selling, etc. 
•	Risks - Not communicating and reaching out effectively, or incurring excessive costs in doing so, resulting in a lack of awareness, lost revenue, or lower profitability as the case may be. 
 
5.	What is the difference between the chief marketing officer as a strategist versus a commercializer? 
Why should the role be clarified as part of the hiring process?   (p.474) 
•	The strategist - makes decisions about the market strategies, but lets business line leaders decide marketing-mix activities in accordance with market strategies 
•	The commercializer - drives sales through marketing activities, and directs business line leaders on how to market products and services based on market strategies 
•	The marketing leader - is both a strategist and a commercializer 
Role needs to be clarified because there is a general misunderstanding of what CMOs are responsible for, which may cause frustrations, departures and ineffective marketing strategies and practices. 
 
6.	Explain the importance of integration between marketing and sales functions.  (p.476) Sales functions are responsible for personal selling, including customer relationship management. The activities of sales functions need to be carried out consistently with market strategies and marketing-mix activities. In particular, pricing and promotion decisions and activities must be well coordinated. Sales functions have the ability to provide very good insights on customer needs, wants and expectations to help identify what customers value most. This information needs to be captured systematically and communicated to marketing. 
 
7.	Explain the importance of integration between marketing and operations management. (p.476) Operations management needs demand forecasts from marketing, and relies marketing to predict the effects of marketing initiatives on product and service demand. Product and service design requires the input of operations management to ensure that production is cost-effective. Distribution is a shared responsibility between marketing and operations management. Marketing typically develops the distribution strategy, but operations management looks after the logistics of distribution. 
 
8.	Explain why the risks of not measuring marketing performance are significant.   (p.478) Without measuring marketing performance, it is not possible to determine the extent to which marketing is making a difference, what kind of results are achieved, and whether money is well spent across the marketing mix. There is no denying that organizations that systematically measure and manage marketing performance can achieve a significant competitive advantage. 
 
9.	Briefly explain the process for developing performance indicators in the context of trying to measure marketing performance.  (p.478-479) 
•	Define what marketing success looks like - develop marketing goals, strategies and objectives, and define how success in achieving them can be measured. 
•	Translate the definitions of success into measurable indicators - define metrics (measurement methods) and targets (levels of performance for each metric). Focus on outcomes (e.g. customer satisfaction) as opposed to outputs (e.g. customer surveys) or activities (e.g. hours of feed-back). 
 
10.	How would you define the main risk of marketing research?   (p.480) 
The absence of good marketing insights and market intelligence, resulting in ineffective marketing strategies and plans, lost revenues and lower profitability. 
 
11.	What are examples of sources of risk affective marketing research?   (p.481) How can these sources of risk be mitigated? 
•	Sources of risk - organizations may not understand the potential of marketing research, may not clearly identify and define what they need to research, may not capture meaningful data to work from, or may not conduct thorough and unbiased analysis to draw valid conclusions. They may also have unrealistic expectations about what marketing research can achieve to begin with. 
•	Mitigation - These sources of risk can be mitigated by adopting an effective process for conducting marketing research. Research steps include 1) defining the problem; 2) developing the plan; 3) collecting the data; 4) performing the analysis; and 5) reporting the findings. 
 
12.	What is the most important step for any kind of research, including marketing research?   (p.481) Why is this step so important? 
Correctly defining a problem is the most important step for any kind of research. (…) Unless a problem or issue is well defined, the entire research is unlikely to yield a useful solution. Once the research problem is clearly and correctly defined, it is possible to develop a relevant research plan. 
13.	Explain how the availability bias and the confirmation bias affect marketing research.   (p.482) How can the risk of biased analysis be mitigated? 
When analyzing data, researchers must be careful to avoid cognitive biases such as the availability bias (making judgments based on the most recent or readily available information) and the confirmation bias (paying more attention to information that is consistent with what they believe).  A good approach is to have researchers analyze data independently before they share conclusions. 
 
14.	Why are the Internet and social media sources of risk related to marketing research?   (p.482) Marketing research must be conducted legally and ethically. (…) Of growing concern is the use of Internet and social media information for analytics and digital advertising, and the lack of transparency and privacy associated with these practices. Most Internet and social media users have limited awareness of how their information is used and the extent of the use. Internet and social media firms are often criticized for their lack of transparency in collecting, exchanging and using information for market research and advertising. They are also criticized for not obtaining clear and direct consent from users regarding the use and sharing of information. 
 
15.	Explain push and pull strategies in the context of marketing, and the risks associated   (p.486) 
Strategy 	Description 	Risks 
Push 	Makes products available across the supply chain and tends to rely on personal selling and sales promotion to stimulate market demand.  	Excessive production and inventory, having to lower prices or offer discounts to push inventory. 
Pull 	Creates market demand mostly through advertising, and manages supply chain and production activities to meet customer demand. 	Production and inventory shortages, inability to meet customer demand on a timely basis. 
 
16.	Outline the four types of business market segmentation and their risks.   (p.487) 
Geographic 	Segmentation is either by continent, region, country, state or province, etc. Risk – Does not consider customer differences within geographies. 
Customer 	Based on customer industry, activity, size or type of organization. 
Risk – Some customers are diversified, making the segmentation arbitrary. 
Product use 	Based on why products and services are bought, and how they are used. Risk – May not help discover new types of consumers. 
 
17.	What are the effects and consequences of not achieving distinctive market positioning?   (p.489) Organizations that fail to achieve a distinct position risk price wars with competitors in the same market segment. Moreover, if positioning is not done strategically using the right combination of marketing-mix strategies, organizations can expect that their products and services will not achieve the desirable recognition, resulting in market confusion, customer dissatisfaction, lost revenue, and lower market share. 
 
18.	Why do organizations sometime need to reposition their products or services, and what approach should be used to mitigate the risks of repositioning?   (p.489) 
•	Reasons  -  Organizations benefit from revisiting their market positioning from time to time. Reasons include keeping up with market trends and competitive developments, or simply refreshing and revitalizing stale or stodgy brands.  However, repositioning is risky because it may alienate loyal customers and fail to attract new ones. Repositioning is also very costly. 
•	Mitigation  -  The risks of repositioning can be mitigated by introducing new products or services as separate brands, and gradually phasing out old brands that are no longer strategic or profitable. It can be much easier and cost-effective to create a new perception than to try to change an old one. Introducing new brands and phasing out old ones is known as brand portfolio management. 
19.	How would you describe the risks associated with inadequate customer profiling?   (p.490-493) Profiling helps organizations become customer-centric, namely focused on understanding and satisfying target customers. The main risk perhaps can be defined as not thoroughly understanding target customers and not providing a satisfying experience, resulting in missed opportunities, lower sales, lack of repeat business, dissatisfied customers, and tarnished reputation.  More specific risks can be defined based the objectives of each step of the profiling process. 
 
20.	How can the shortcomings of marketing plans be mitigated?   (p.494) 
According to marketing executives, marketing plans are often overly optimistic, contain insufficient competitive analysis, and are too focused on the short-term. A good approach for mitigating [these shortcomings] is to specifically outline the short-term versus long-term marketing objectives for each target segment, and submit the marketing plan for peer review. (…) It is also advisable to solicit the advice of external marketing experts who can provide independent insight on the competitive analysis, and the marketing strategies and objectives. 
 
21.	What are the four significant sources of risk that counter the benefits of branding?   (p.494) 
•	Limited brand recognition - happens when marketing-mix activities are not effective at creating a desirable brand that is widely recognized based on the organizations marketing strategies. 
•	Inadequate brand portfolio management - happens when organizations do not have a clear policy or a defined process for managing declining brands. 
•	Undelivered brand promises - happens when the actual brand experience fails to meet customer expectations, resulting in a broken promise and lack of repeat business. 
•	Counterfeit products - involves illegal imitations typically sold through disreputable channels and suppliers. Counterfeits are almost always inferior in quality, which breaks the brand promise. 
 
22.	How can organizations mitigate the risk of undelivered brand promises?   (p.497) Marketers can mitigate the risk of undelivered brand promises by:  
•	Ensuring that marketing-mix strategies convey the right messages for their brands. 
•	Soliciting input and feed-back from customers on their expectations and experiences. 
•	Monitoring brand performance using standards that are consistent with expectations. 
•	Training and empowering employees to deliver on the brand experience. 
 
23.	What considerations need to be taken into account when making pricing decisions.   (p.499) 
•	Organizational strategies - prices need to be consistent with market and branding strategies. 
•	Customer value perceptions - need to take into account the perceptions of target customers. 
•	Competitive pressures - especially important is crowded markets with limited differentiation. 
•	Costs - need to set prices that will result in a profit, or accept to incur losses. 
•	Product lifecycle - prices need to be revised at each stage based on demand, competition, etc. 
•	Disruptive pricing trends - need to consider pricing trends that disrupt consumer behaviors. 
 
24.	How can pricing risks be mitigated?   (p.500) 
A pricing management framework that encompasses the following: 
•	Pricing strategy or policy that outlines pricing objectives, methods, responsibilities, etc. 
•	Process and methods for conducting pricing analyses and making decisions. 
•	Pricing software tools to facilitate information gathering and analysis 
•	Communication of the pricing strategy, policy and processes across the organization 
•	Hiring of qualified and experienced professionals in the field of pricing 
•	Professional training to managers and staff involved with pricing 
•	Expert group or committee responsible for advice, decisions, oversight, etc. 
•	Adoption of indicators for monitoring pricing performance and pricing results 
 
 
25.	What are the advantages and disadvantages of in-store distribution?   (p.503) Does in-store distribution continue to be an important channel according to you? 
In-Store Distribution	Online Distribution
 
Advantages:	Advantages:
•	Ability to examine products before buying	• Lower operating and marketing costs
•	Guidance, advice, answers to questions	• More products can be offered
•	In-store shoppers discover other items of interest	• Product information documented for reference
•	Easier to return products and obtain services	• Greater outreach, including remote locations
Disadvantages:	Disadvantages:
•	Higher operating and marketing costs	• Order fulfillment costs and shipping charges
•	Finding the right locations can be a challenge	• Limited ability to establish customer relationships
•	Consumers have to travel to the store	• Leads to more product returns
 
Although online sales continue to grow, eighty percent of consumer purchases were expected to happen in stores during 2020, according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the U.S. Department of Commerce. 
 
26.	What are the components of the promotional mix?   (p.504) 
• 
• 
• 	Advertising 
Sales promotion 
Direct marketing 	• 
• 
• 	Digital marketing 
Personal selling 
Public relations 
 
27.	What approach can be taken to measure the performance of promotion-mix component?   (p.505) Measuring the performance of promotion activities is complex because not all activities lead to immediate results. Organizations need to define what success looks like for each promotional mix component, and translate the definitions of success into meaningful indicators. For example, digital marketers use indicators such as impression count (adds displayed or viewed), click-through rate (clicks for information), and conversion rate (information downloads and orders). 
 
28.	Explain the strategic importance of customer service.   (p.509) 
•	On average, forty percent of customers who experience bad customer service stop doing business with the offending company. Because only a small fraction of dissatisfied customers make a complaint, it can be difficult for organizations to realize the extent of their customer service problems. Dissatisfied customers often refrain from complaining. 
•	Well managed organizations recognize the strategic importance of customer service. They make it easy for customers to complain, provide formal training to employees responsible for managing complaints, respond quickly to complaints, and resolve complaints on the first contact. (…) They recognize that insights from customers can present tremendous opportunities for improvement 
 
 
Multiple Choice Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Marketing applies: 
a)	Only to organizations that sell goods and services for a price to the buyer. 
b)	Only to companies that sell goods and services to other companies or consumers. 
c)	Only to companies that sell goods and services to end consumers. 
d)	To all types of organizations, including colleges, hospitals and municipalities. e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.470 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
2. Marketing risks include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Inability to effectively communicate products and services. 
b)	Inability to offer goods or services that appeal to customers. 
c)	Inability to offer goods or services that provide superior value. 
d)	Ineffective distribution channels (wholesalers, distributors, retailers, direct). 
e)	Spending too much or too little on marketing initiatives. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	f) 	p.470-471 
3. The two main branches of marketing are: 
a)	Marketing and sales. 
b)	Consumer products and customer service. 
c)	Direct sales versus intermediaries. 
d)	B2B and B2C marketing. 
e)	Consumer products and services. 
f)	Industrial goods and services. 
g)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.470-471 
4. Downsides of selling directly to end customers to avoid intermediaries include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Less profitability from avoiding intermediaries. 
b)	Less outreach and visibility to end customers. 
c)	Alienating wholesalers, distributors or retailers. 
d)	Costly distribution if products sold in small quantities. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.471 
5. The four components of the marketing mix are: 
a)	Production, marketing, sales, distribution. 
b)	Location, warehousing, distribution, delivery. 
c)	Advertising, promotion, direct marketing, digital marketing. 
d)	Design, branding, packaging, customer support. 
e)	Product and service, price, place, promotion. 
f)	Solution, access, value, education. 
g)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.472 
6. The risk that a product offering may not appeal to customers, resulting in a lack of demand, lost revenues and lower profitability is a risk that applies to the following component(s) of the marketing mix: a) Product and service 
b)	Price 
c)	Place 
d)	Promotion 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.472 
7. The risk of not adequately facilitating customer buying, or incurring excessive costs in doing so, is a risk that applies to the following component(s) of the marketing mix: a) Product and service 
b)	Price 
c)	Place 
d)	Promotion 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.473 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
8. Price is an important component of the marketing mix because:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Setting a price too high affects the ability to differentiate products. 
b)	Setting a price too low results in lower revenues and lower profitability. 
c)	Setting a price too high results in lost sales and lower profitability. 
d)	Setting a price too low affects the ability to attract customers. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 
c) 	p.472 
9. Promotion is an important component of the marketing mix because:  
(select all that apply) 
a)	Not offering a product that appeals to customers results in lack of demand. 
b)	Lack of customer awareness results in lost sales and lower profitability. 
c)	Not adequately facilitating customer buying results in lost sales. 
d)	Excessive, costly or unnecessary advertising results in lower profitability. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 
d) 	p.473 
10.  The roles and responsibilities of chief marketing officers (CMOs) are:  
(select all that apply) 
a)	Generally clear and do not pose a problem in most organizations. 
b)	Not a significant source of risk because CMOs understand what is expected. 
c)	Generally unclear, causing frustrations among senior executives. 
d)	A significant source of risk that can affect market strategies and practices. 
e)	Generally well understood by those responsible for marketing activities. 
f)	Not a significant source of risk as long as market strategies are clear. 	c) 
d) 	p.474-475 
11. The following techniques are relevant for mitigating the risk of CMO frustrations  and departures, resulting in ineffective marketing strategies: (select all that apply) a) Enquire to CMO candidates on their expectations and motivations. 
b)	Clarify roles and responsibilities with CMO candidates during the hiring process. 
c)	Outline how marketing success is defined and how performance will be measured. 
d)	Outlines roles, responsibilities, authorities and accountabilities in letters of offer. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.474-475 
12. The chief marketing officer (CMO) as a commercializer means that the CMO: 
a)	Makes decisions about the market strategies, but lets business line leaders decide marketing-mix activities in accordance with market strategies. 
b)	Drives sales through marketing activities, and directs business line leaders on how to market products and services based on market strategies. 
c)	Makes decisions about market strategies and marketing activities. 
d)	Manages only the promotion activities for commercializing products and services. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.474 
13. Marketing needs to be integrated with other functions because: 
a)	Marketing otherwise becomes inconsistent, confused and much less effective. 
b)	Marketing functions cannot decide on market strategies without consultations. 
c)	Marketing otherwise becomes isolated, which causes frustrations and departures. 
d)	Marketing functions cannot make marketing-mix decisions on their own. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.475 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
14. Sources of risk affecting marketing integration include:  (select all that apply) a) Dysfunctional cultures 
b)	Competing goals and priorities 
c)	Unclear allocation of roles and responsibilities 
d)	Formal education and language barriers 
e)	Inconsistent performance metrics 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	f) 	p.476-477 
15. Integration between marketing and sales functions is important because: 
a)	Sales activities need to be carried out consistently with marketing-mix activities. 
b)	Sales functions report to senior executives from marketing. 
c)	Marketing activities are carried out without input from sales functions. 
d)	Marketing functions depend on sales information for managing customer accounts. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.476 
16. Close to ________ chief executive officers agree that marketers are always asking for more money, but can rarely explain how much incremental business will be generated. a) Twenty-five percent 
b)	Fifty percent 
c)	Seventy-five percent 
d)	Ninety-five percent 	c) 	p.477 
17. Less than ________ chief marketing officers believe that their marketing function quantifies and communicates the business value and financial impact of marketing campaigns quite well or extremely well. a) Five percent 
b)	Twenty-five percent 
c)	Fifty percent 
d)	Seventy-five percent 	b) 	p.477 
18. The expectations gap regarding the reporting of marketing performance means that: 
a)	Senior executives expect better marketing initiatives but chief marketing officers and marketing functions are unable to deliver them. 
b)	Senior executives expect marketers to be able to demonstrate the value of marketing expenses given the abundance of data available, while marketers find it increasingly difficult to demonstrate the value of marketing expenses. 
c)	Board members want share prices to increase, but senior management is spending too much on marketing initiatives, which are driving down profitability. 
d)	Customers expect products and services to be of good quality at a reasonable price, but they are often disappointed with the goods and services purchased. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.477 
19. Without measuring marketing performance, it is not possible to: 
a)	Determine if too much is spent on marketing compared to industry competitors. 
b)	Decide on whether additional marketing initiatives should be carried out or not. 
c)	Determine if marketing is making a difference and whether money is well spent. 
d)	Get more money approved by senior executives towards marketing efforts. 
e)	Find out is customers value the marketing that is being done or not. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	c) 	p.477 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
20. When measuring performance related to marketing or any other management function of business line, it is better to focus on: 
a)	Plans - because they outline what needs to be done. 
b)	Activities - because they represent what is actually being done. 
c)	Outputs - because they are easier to measure and control. 
d)	Outcomes - because they focus on what needs to be achieved. 
e)	Money - because success is mostly measured in dollars. 	d) 	p.478-479 
21. Marketing research is: 
a)	A process for analyzing market strategies, marketing-mix activities and determine their added value in relation to marketing goals, strategies and objectives. 
b)	An approach for conducting customers surveys and analyzing statistical results. 
c)	A process for systematically collecting and analyzing market, customer and competitor data to inform marketing decisions. 
d)	A method that helps determine if marketing initiatives have a chance of success. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.480 
22. Marketing research mitigates marketing risks because: 
a)	It involves a process for marketing decisions based on statistical data analysis. 
b)	It results in a model for making decisions about the marketing mix. 
c)	It is supported by social media applications that interact with customers. 
d)	It enables more data to be collected outside of the organization. 
e)	It provides insights and market intelligence on customers and competitors. f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.480 
23. The steps for conducting marketing research (or any other research) are: 
a)	Discuss the approach, develop a plan, gather information, conduct the analysis, and draw conclusions. 
b)	Define the problem, develop the plan, collect the data, perform the analysis, and report the findings. 
c)	Describe the outcome, discuss the problem, detail the plan, carry out surveys, analyze the data, and draw conclusions. 
d)	Detail the plan, get it approved, carry it out, report on progress, analyze results and report the findings.. 
e)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.481-482 
24. The most important step in marketing research (or any other research) is: a) Defining the problem. 
b)	Developing a plan. 
c)	Collecting the data. 
d)	Performing the analysis. 
e)	Reporting the findings. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.481 
25. Sources of risk applicable to marketing research include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Setting unrealistic expectations about what marketing research can achieve. 
b)	Not understanding the potential of marketing research. 
c)	Not clearly identifying and defining what needs to be researched. 
d)	Not capturing meaningful or reliable information to work from. 
e)	Not conducting thorough and unbiassed analyses to draw valid conclusions. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	f) 	p.481 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
26. Establishing a policy for marketing research is particularly important because: 
a)	There is otherwise no authority for conducting marketing research. 
b)	It is the only way to define responsibilities for conducting marketing research. 
c)	The policy helps make sure that marketing research gets done on a timely basis. 
d)	It outlines acceptable practices and those that are unlawful or deemed unethical. 
e)	Marketing research may not be successful if it is not in compliance with a policy. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.482 
27. Internet and social media are sources of risk related to marketing research because: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	It is not clear which social media is the most effective for marketing purposes. 
b)	There is too much unreliable information, fake news, and cybersecurity risks. 
c)	Some people spend little time on the Internet and are not interested in social media. 
d)	Facebook does not have a good approach for user account settings and security. 
e)	Social media can be a waste of time, especially regarding likes and dislikes. 
f)	Internet and social media firms lack of transparency in collecting, exchanging and using information, and often do not obtain clear and direct consent from users. g) All of the above. 
h) None of the above. 	e) 	p.482 
28. A marketing strategy is: 
a)	The plans and approaches developed for achieving a higher level of performance. 
b)	An approach for competing based on market coverage and competitive advantage. 
c)	The identification and selection of markets, and the combination of approaches planned for achieving a competitive advantage in those markets. 
d)	The philosophies and ideologies that drive how an organization markets its products and services (e.g. product-oriented approach, market-oriented approach) e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.484 
29. The main risks of marketing strategies are:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Inability to secure funding for carrying out marketing-mix activities. 
b)	Inconsistencies with market strategies. 
c)	Ineffective or conflicting marketing orientations and marketing-mix decisions. 
d)	Absent or unclear marketing plans and market directions. 
e)	Lack of support from senior executives in approving marketing plans. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above 	b) 
c) 	p.485 
30. The main risks of marketing strategies can be mitigated by:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Appointing a competent chief marketing officer that provides leadership. 
b)	Adopting integration mechanisms that create alignment for marketing. 
c)	Developing a marketing plan that outlines marketing directions and decisions. 
d)	Communicating the plan and monitoring its execution. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.485 
31. With a product orientation approach: 
a)	Organizations conduct extensive research to identify unmet customer needs before developing new products. With this approach, risks include a  focus on existing customers, less innovative products, and missed opportunities to disrupt. 
b)	Organizations continuously develop innovative products and test market demand for their products after they have been developed. With this approach, risks include lower demand than anticipated and research and development losses. c) None of the above. 	b) 	p.485 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
32. With a market orientation approach: 
a)	Organizations focus on selling as much as possible, by advertising extensively, having a salesforce, or relying on dealers, distributors and agents. With this approach, risks include shortermism and selling tactics that turn off customers. 
b)	Organizations look for ways to gain market share by providing value to customers. They do so by offering superior products at lower prices. With this approach, risks include too many differentiated products adding production costs. c) None of the above. 	c) 	p.485 
33. With a push-demand marketing strategy: 
a)	Organizations make products available across the supply chain and rely on personal selling and promotions to stimulate demand. With this approach, risks include excessive production and inventory, and having to lower prices or offer discounts. 
b)	Organization create market demand mostly through advertising and manage the supply chain to meet customer demand. With this approach, risks include production and inventory shortages, and inability to meet demand on a timely basis. c) None of the above. 	a) 	p.486 
34. With a transactional marketing strategy: 
a)	Organizations seek to develop a long term relationship with customers in order to maximize repeat business over time. With this approach, risks include time consuming business relationships that may not always be profitable. 
b)	Organizations view customer sales as single events or individual transactions, and try to get the highest price for products. With this approach, risks include not nurturing customer relationships, affecting reputation and long term profitability. c) None of the above. 	b) 	p.486 
35. The purpose of segmentation, targeting, positioning and profiling is to: 
a)	Decide on which geographic markets should be targeted, and how to effectively position products and services within these markets based on customer profiles. 
b)	Make decisions regarding which customer groups should be targeted, and how to effectively market to them, creating a customer centric-approach to marketing. 
c)	Analyze markets to decide on market strategies related to market coverage (broad or focused) and competitive advantage (low cost or differentiation). 
d)	Develop marketing-mix strategies that are consistent with market strategies. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.486 
36. The purpose of market segmentation is: 
a)	To divide a market into distinctive customer groups, and analyze these groups in order to determine which ones should be targeted and how. 
b)	To apply a focused market differentiation strategy that distinguishes products and services from those of competitors. 
c)	To analyze how competitors market their products and services in different markets in order to make marketing-mix decisions. 
d)	All of the above. 
e)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.487 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
37. The decision to segment a market in one way or another should be based on: 
a)	The markets that are targeted as part of focused market strategies. 
b)	The market positioning that the organizations wants to do within each market. 
c)	The demand strategies (push or pull) that the organization wants to implement. 
d)	The extent of the differences that become apparent with the segmentation,  and the extent that marketing-mix variations can address those differences. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.486 
38. Market segmentation based on demographics involves the following risks: 
a)	It does not consider consumer differences within geographies. 
b)	The marketing based on such attributes may be perceived negatively. 
c)	The segmentation may be overly complex and time consuming. 
d)	This approach may not help discover new types of consumers. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.487 
39. Market segmentation based on product use involves the following risks: 
a)	It does not consider consumer differences within geographies. 
b)	The marketing based on such attributes may be perceived negatively. 
c)	The segmentation may be overly complex and time consuming. 
d)	This approach may not help discover new types of consumers. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.487 
40. Market positioning is: 
a)	Dividing a market into distinctive customer groups, and analyzing these groups in order to determine which ones should be targeted and how. 
b)	Deciding on a differentiation market strategy for products and services. 
c)	Creating a clear and distinct perception in the minds of customers, based on what  an organization wants its products and services to represent relative to competitors. 
d)	Analyzing market segments to develop a solid understanding of customer groups. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.488-489 
41. A value for money market positioning strategy: 
a)	Emphasizes the advantages and satisfaction obtained by customers. 
b)	Focuses on attributes that are important for target groups. 
c)	Emphasizes high product or service quality relative to the price paid. 
d)	Focuses on the ability to go above and beyond what competitors do. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.489 
42. The risks associated with a value for money market positioning strategy are that: 
a)	Some attributes may appeal only to a narrow market segment. 
b)	It may create negative perceptions by other groups of customers. 
c)	Low prices and high quality typically result in narrower profit margins. 
d)	It may results in additional costs that competitors do not have. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.489 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
43. The direct effects and resulting consequences of not achieving a distinctive market positioning include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Risk price wars with competitors that are in the same market segment. 
b)	Products and services that will not achieve a desirable recognition. 
c)	Market confusion and customer dissatisfaction 
d)	Lost revenue and lower market share 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.489 
44. The risk of repositioning a product or service is best mitigated by: 
a)	Trying to change consumer perceptions by carrying out marketing-mix activities. 
b)	Targeting new or different customer segments with the same products or services. 
c)	Applying a relational market strategy to manage customer relationships effectively. 
d)	Introducing new products or services as separate brands and gradually phasing  out old brands that are no longer strategic or profitable. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.489 
45. In the context of marketing, profiling is: 
a)	Developing a risk profile for the marketing function. 
b)	The analysis of the market segments selected by the organization, in order to  develop a solid understanding of target customer groups.  
c)	Developing a profile of customers based on their age, gender, ethnicity, education level, income level, occupation, religion, or other demographic attributes. 
d)	The analysis of marketing-mix activities to determine which ones should be maintained or abandoned based on market strategies. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.490 
46. In the context of marketing, the steps of profiling are: 
a)	Developing a risk profile, developing an action plan, carrying out the plan, monitoring progress, reporting results, and making course corrections. 
b)	Defining market segments, deciding which customers to target, analyzing market positioning options, and making decisions regarding marketing-mix activities. 
c)	Identifying primary customers, understanding behaviors and value drivers, defining the customer experience, and decoding the path to purchase. 
d)	Initial consideration, request for information, on-site examination, follow-up enquiries, buying and payment, post-purchase enquiries, and after sales service. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.490-493 
47. The risks associated with inadequate profiling is best described as: 
a)	Not developing a relevant and useful risk profile of the marketing function, resulting in significant risks not being identified and managed proactively. 
b)	Not defining market segments and deciding which customers to target, resulting  in confusing and ineffective marketing-mix activities, lower sales, lack of repeat business, dissatisfied customers, and a tarnished reputation. 
c)	Not thoroughly understanding target customers, and not providing a satisfying customer experience, resulting in missed opportunities, lower sales, lack of repeat business, dissatisfied customers, and a tarnished reputation. 
d)	Inconsistencies with market strategies, and ineffective or conflicting marketing orientations and marketing mix-decisions, resulting in lower sales, lack of repeat business, dissatisfied customers, and a tarnished reputation. 	c) 	p.490-493 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
48. The common shortcomings of marketing plans include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Being overly optimistic about sales or revenues. 
b)	Containing insufficient competitive analysis. 
c)	Short term focus - not enough focus on the long term. 
d)	All of the above. 
e)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.493 
49. The shortcomings of marketing plans can be mitigated by:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Specifically outlining short term versus long term objectives by target segment. 
b)	Submitting the plan for peer review and feed-back from external marketing experts. 
c)	Analyzing actual results and comparing to plan. 
d)	Revising plans as the year progresses and adjusting plans to actual results. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.494 
50. The four significant sources of risk that counter the benefits of branding are: 
a)	Limited branding investments, inappropriate brand positioning, undelivered products and services, and misleading brand advertising. 
b)	Limited brand recognition, inadequate financial management, undelivered products due to inventory shortages, and counterfeit products. 
c)	Unclear or confusing brand image, unsuccessful management of declining brands, inadequate management of the marketing-mix, and damaged reputation. 
d)	Limited brand recognition, inadequate brand portfolio management, undelivered brand promise, and counterfeit products. 
e)	High prices, low quality, ineffective distribution and no after sales service. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.494 
51. The following actions mitigate the risk of undelivered brand promises:  
(select all that apply) 
a)	Ensuring that marketing-mix strategies convey the right messages for brands. 
b)	Soliciting input and feed-back from customers on their expectations and experiences. 
c)	Monitoring brand performance using standards consistent with expectations. 
d)	Training and empowering employees to deliver on the brand experience. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.497 
52. The following actions mitigate the risks associated with counterfeit products:  
(select all that apply) 
a)	Monitoring distribution channels, retail stores and the Internet to detect counterfeits. 
b)	Soliciting legal advice, hiring investigators, and issuing cease and desist letters. 
c)	Reporting counterfeiters to law enforcement agencies. 
d)	Taking legal action to seize counterfeit assets and obtain financial compensation. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.498 
53. The main risk of pricing is to: 
a)	Set prices to high and not having enough sales as a result. 
b)	Set prices to low, and not collecting enough money from sales. 
c)	Set a price too high or too low, and have to make adjustments after the fact. 
d)	Set a price too high or too low in relation to the value perceived by customers. 
e)	Incorrectly charge sales taxes and incurring legal liabilities as a result. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	d) 	p.499 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
54. Challenges frequently encountered with pricing include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Not having a well-defined pricing strategy. 
b)	Having a pricing strategy that is misaligned with organizational goals. 
c)	Lack of pricing expertise and limited pricing analytics. 
d)	Lack of pricing performance monitoring. 
e)	Information overload affecting pricing decisions. 
f)	Duplication of roles and responsibilities regarding pricing. g) a), b), c) and d) 
h)	c), d), e) and f) 
i)	All of the above. 	g) 	p.500 
55. Cost-based pricing has the following challenges or risks:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Ignores external factors such as customer perceptions of value. 
b)	Misallocation of fixed costs across products or services. 
c)	May no longer be relevant if costs rise. 
d)	Does not allow for price discounts. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.501 
56. Competitive pricing has the following challenges and risks:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Customers may be suspicious that price fixing is going on. 
b)	It may force an organization to renege on its market or marketing strategies. 
c)	When prices are set competitively, there is no more room for discounts. 
d)	Lowering or matching prices squeezes profit margins and may lead to price wars. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 
d) 	p.501 
57. Key considerations in making pricing decisions include: 
a)	Setting a price that remains constant throughout the product lifecycle. 
b)	Ignoring disruptive pricing trends because they are negatively perceived. 
c)	Ensuring that prices are consistent with market and branding strategies. 
d)	Taking into account the perceptions of value that target customers have. 
e)	Ignoring customer reactions if applying skimming and dynamic pricing. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.499 
58. The following approaches mitigate the risks associated with pricing: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Processes and methods for conducting pricing analyses and making decisions. 
b)	Professional training to managers and staff involved with pricing. 
c)	Expert group or committee responsible for pricing advice, decisions, oversight, etc. 
d)	Adopting of indicators for monitoring pricing performance and pricing results. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.500 
59. An omnichannel strategy is: 
a)	A strategy where only one distribution channel is used for reaching out. 
b)	A strategy where multiple consumer segments are targeted at the same time. 
c)	The use of multiple geographic markets for distributing products globally. 
d)	The use multiple channels such as websites, smartphone applications, social media, telephone ordering, and in-store shopping. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.502-503 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
60. The main risk(s) of an omnichannel strategy are:  (select all that apply) 
a)	The lack of integration across channels. 
b)	The costs of maintaining multiple channels. 
c)	The reluctance of consumers to switch from one channel to the other. 
d)	The inability to attract consumers in-store if they prefer to buy online. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.502 
61. The advantage(s) of in-store distribution include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Ability to examine products before buying. 
b)	Guidance, advice, answers to questions more readily available. 
c)	In-store shoppers often discover other items of interest. 
d)	Easier to return products and obtain services. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.503 
62. The disadvantage(s) of online distribution include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Order fulfillment costs and shipping charges. 
b)	Limited ability to establish customer relationships 
c)	Leads to more product returns. 
d)	All of the above. 
e)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.503 
63. Promotion is:  (select all that apply) 
a)	The creation of a brand using marketing-mix strategies. 
b)	The combination of approaches for offering discounts, rebates and credit terms. 
c)	A set of marketing activities related to price, location and advertising. 
d)	The combination of approaches for communicating products and services, and influencing customer purchase decisions.  
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.504 
64. The main risk of promotion is: 
a)	Not recognizing disruptive trends and technologies affecting promotion methods, and not choosing the right promotional mix to reach target customers. 
b)	Not communicating and reaching out to customers effectively in order to influence purchasing decisions, or incurring excessive costs in doing so. 
c)	Not using promotional methods effectively, not setting the right expectations, delivering inconsistent messages, and not measuring the performance of methods. 
d)	Not making products and services available to end customers as effectively as competitors, or incurring excessive costs in doing so. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.505 
65. An effective approach to mitigate the risks and sources of risk of promotion is to: 
a)	Conduct surveys to determine what promotion activities are the most enjoyable. 
b)	Lower prices and offer deep discounts to entice customers to make a purchase. 
c)	Plan promotional activities using a structured and integrated approach. 
d)	Develop a social media strategy and application to track online behaviors. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.506 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
66. The main risk of sales is: 
a)	Putting too much pressure on customers when they only want information. 
b)	Inadvertently offering discounts to customer willing to pay the full price. 
c)	Not contacting customers on a timely basis to propose new products or services. 
d)	Making gratuitous comments that customers know cannot be relied upon. 
e)	Not appropriately influencing buying decisions or incurring excessive costs doing so. f) None of the above. 	e) 	p.506 
 
 
True or False Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Marketing applies to all types of organizations, including colleges, hospitals, municipalities, charities, and government entities. 	True 	p.470 
2. Marketing only applies to companies that sell goods and services for a profit to other companies or to end consumers. 	False 	p.470 
3. Marketing risks include inability to offer goods and services that appeal to customers, and that provide superior value than what competitors have to offer. 	True 	p.470-471 
4. The two main branches of marketing are marketing and sales. 	False 	p.470-471 
5. The two main branches of marketing are B2B and B2C marketing. 	True 	p.470-471 
6. Marketing is a major source of expenditure for most organizations, accounting for up to twenty percent of revenues in the case of consumer service companies. 	True 	p.470-471 
7. The four components of the marketing mix are product and service, price, place, and promotion. 	True 	p.472 
8. The four components of the marketing mix are advertising, promotion, warehousing and distribution. 	False 	p.472 
9. The risk that a product offering may not appeal to customers, resulting in a lack of demand, lost revenues and lower profitability is a risk that applies to the product and service component of the marketing mix. 	True 	p.472 
10. The risk that a product offering may not appeal to customers, resulting in a lack of demand, lost revenues and lower profitability is a risk that applies to the promotion component of the marketing mix. 	False 	p.472 
11. The risk of not adequately facilitating customer buying, or incurring excessive costs in doing so, is a risk that applies to the place component of the marketing mix. 	True 	p.473 
12. The risk of not adequately facilitating customer buying, or incurring excessive costs in doing so, is a risk that applies to the promotion component of the marketing mix. 	False 	p.473 
13. Promotion is an important component of the marketing mix because not effectively communicating and reaching out to customers, or incurring excessive costs in doing so, results in lack of awareness, lost revenue or lower profitability as the case may be. 	True 	p.473 
14. Promotion is an important component of the marketing mix because not offering a product or service that appeals to customers results in a lack of demand, lost revenues and lower profitability. 	False 	p.473 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
15. The position of chief marketing officer (CMO) has the highest turnover among senior executives. Eighty percent of chief executive officers are dissatisfied with their CMO. 	True 	p.474 
16. The position of chief marketing officer (CMO) has the lowest turnover among senior executives. Eighty percent of chief executive officers are satisfied with their CMO. 	False 	p.474 
17. The roles and responsibilities of chief marketing officers (CMOs) are a source of malaise within organizations because there is confusion and unclear expectations about what a CMO does, and wide differences in the knowledge and skills of marketing executives. 	True 	p.474 
18. The roles and responsibilities of chief marketing officers (CMOs) are not a source of malaise within organizations because it is normally clear what is expected from a CMO. 	False 	p.474 
19. The chief marketing officer (CMO) as a commercializer means that the CMO drives sales through marketing activities, and directs business line leaders on how to market products and services based on market strategies. 	True 	p.474 
20. The chief marketing officer (CMO) as a commercializer means that the CMO makes decisions about the market strategies, but lets business line leaders decide marketingmix activities in accordance with market strategies. 	False 	p.474 
21. Marketing needs to be integrated with other functions because marketing would otherwise be inconsistent, confused and much less effective. 	True 	p.475 
22. Marketing needs to be integrated with other functions because marketing functions depend entirely on other functions for making marketing-mix decisions. 	False 	p.475 
23. Sources of risk affecting marketing integration include dysfunctional cultures, competing goals and priorities, and inconsistent performance metrics. 	True 	p.476-477 
24. Sources of risk affecting marketing integration include one way communications, closed door policies, financial management controls, and government regulations. 	False 	p.476-477 
25. Integration between marketing and sales functions is important because sales activities need to be carried out consistently with marketing-mix activities. 	True 	p.476 
26. Integration between marketing and sales functions is important because marketing functions depend on sales information for customer relationship management. 	False 	p.476 
27. Close to seventy-five percent of chief executive officers agree that marketers always ask for more money, but can rarely explain how much more business will be generated. 	True 	p.477 
28. Without measuring marketing performance, it is not possible to determine if it is making a difference, what kind of results are archived, and whether money is well spent. 	True 	p.477 
29. Without measuring marketing performance, it is not possible to determine if too much money is spent compared to industry competitors and deciding to spend more money. 	False 	p.477 
30. When measuring performance related to marketing or any other management function of business line, it is better to focus on outcomes instead of activities or outputs. 	True 	p.478-479 
31. When measuring performance related to marketing or any other management function of business line, it is better to focus on activities instead of outputs or outcomes. 	False 	p.478-479 
32. Marketing research is a process for systematically collecting and analyzing market, customer and competitor data to inform marketing decisions. 	True 	p.480 
33. Marketing research is a method that helps determine if marketing initiatives have a chance of success, and to explain the added value of spending more on marketing. 	False 	p.480 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
34. Marketing research mitigates marketing risks because it provides insights and market intelligence on customers and competitors. 	True 	p.480 
35. Marketing research mitigates marketing risks because it leverages social media platforms to gather information about customers with or without their consent. 	False 	p.480 
36. Defining the problem is the most important step applicable to marketing research. 	True 	p.481 
37. Collecting data is the most important step applicable to marketing research. 	False 	p.481 
38. The steps for conducting marketing research are developing a plan, collecting the data, drawing conclusions, and reporting the results. 	False 	p.481 
39. Establishing a policy for marketing research is particularly important because it outlines acceptable practices and those that are unlawful or deemed unethical. 	True 	p.481 
40. Internet and social media firms are transparent with their collection, exchange and use of information, and are ethical about obtaining clear and direct consent from users. 	False 	p.482 
41. A marketing strategy is the identification and selection of markets, and the combination of approaches planned for achieving a competitive advantage in those markets. 	True 	p.484 
42. A marketing strategy is an approach for competing based on competitive advantage (low-cost or differentiation) and market coverage (broad-based or focused). 	False 	p.484 
43. The main risks of marketing strategies are inconsistencies with market strategies, and ineffective or conflicting marketing orientations and marketing-mix decisions. 	True 	p.485 
44. The main risks of marketing strategies are absent or unclear marketing plans and directions, and lack of support from senior executives for carrying out the plans. 	False 	p.485 
45. A product orientation approach involves developing innovative products and testing market demand after the products have been developed. With this approach, risks include lower demand than anticipated, and possible research and development losses. 	True 	p.485 
46. A product orientation approach involves conducting extensive research to identify unmet customer needs before developing new products. With this approach, risks include less innovative products, and missed opportunities to disrupt. 	False 	p.485 
47. A market orientation approach involves determining what customers need before offering new products. With this approach, risks include overly focusing on existing customers, and the inability to develop innovative or disruptive products. 	True 	p.485 
48. A market orientation approach focuses on selling as much as possible, by advertising extensively, having a salesforce, or relying on dealers, distributors and agents. With this approach, risks include shortermism and selling tactics that turn off customers. 	False 	p.485 
49. A push-demand strategy makes products available across the supply chain and relies on personal selling and promotions to stimulate demand. With this approach, risks include excessive inventory, and having to lower prices or offer discounts. 	True 	p.486 
50. A push-demand strategy creates market demand mostly through advertising and manages the supply chain to meet customer demand. With this approach, risks include production and inventory shortages, and inability to meet demand on a timely basis. 	False 	p.486 
51. A transactional marketing strategy views customer sales as single events or individual transactions, and tries to get the highest price for products sold. With this approach, risks include not nurturing customer relationships, affecting long term profitability. 	True 	p.486 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
52. A transactional marketing strategy seeks to develop long term relationships with customers in order to maximize repeat business over time. With this approach, risks include time consuming business relationships that may not always be profitable. 	False 	p.486 
53. The purpose of market segmentation is to divide a market into distinctive customer groups, and analyze these groups to determine which ones should be targeted and how. 	True 	p.487 
54. The purpose of market segmentation is to analyze how competitors market their products and services in different markets in order to make marketing-mix decisions. 	False 	p.487 
55. Demographic segmentation risks include possibilities of negative perceptions. 	True 	p.487 
56. Product-use segmentation risks include complexity and time consuming efforts. 	False 	p.487 
57. Market positioning is creating a clear and distinct perception in the minds of customers, based on what an organization wants its products and services to represent. 	True 	p.488-489 
58. Market positioning is analyzing market segments to develop a solid understanding of customer groups in order to decide on a low-cost or differentiation market strategy. 	False 	p.488-489 
59. A customer benefits market positioning strategy emphasizes the meaning (e.g. sense of pride) and satisfaction obtained from a product or service. 	True 	p.489 
60. A customer benefits market positioning strategy focuses on product or service attributes that are important for target customer groups. 	False 	p.489 
61. The direct effects and resulting consequences of not achieving distinctive market positioning include price wars with competitors, lack of product recognition, market confusion, customer dissatisfaction, lower revenue and lower market share. 	True 	p.489 
62. Organizations benefit from repositioning their products and services from time to time. 	True 	p.489 
63. Portfolio brand management mitigates the risks of obsolete or unprofitable products and services, and the risks associated with repositioning an existing product or service. 	True 	p.489 
64. The risk of repositioning a product or service is best mitigated by trying to change consumer perceptions by modifying marketing-mix activities to change perceptions. 	False 	p.489 
65. In the context of marketing, profiling is the analysis of the market segments selected by the organization, in order to develop a solid understanding of target customer groups.  	True 	p.490 
66. In the context of marketing, profiling is developing a profile of customers based on their age, gender, ethnicity, education level, income level, occupation, religion, etc. 	False 	p.490 
67. In the context of marketing, profiling involves identifying primary customers, understanding behaviors and value drivers, defining the customer experience, and decoding the path to purchase. 	True 	p.490-493 
68. In the context of marketing, profiling involves defining market segments, deciding which customers to target, analyzing market positioning options, and making decisions regarding marketing-mix activities. 	False 	p.490-493 
69. The risks associated with inadequate profiling can be described as not thoroughly understanding target customers, and not providing a satisfying customer experience, resulting in missed opportunities, lower sales, and lack of repeat business. 	True 	p.490-493 
70. The risks associated with inadequate profiling can be described as not clearly defining market segments, resulting in confusing and ineffective marketing-mix activities, missed opportunities, lower sales, and lack of repeat business. 	False 	p.490-493 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
71. A good marketing plan reaffirms the soundness of market strategies, describes marketing orientations, and details marketing-mix decisions and activities by target segment, and by product or service. 	True 	p.493 
72. The shortcomings of marketing plans include being overly optimistic about sales, containing insufficient competitive analysis, and being too focused on the short term. 	True 	p.493 
73. The shortcomings of marketing plans include not being realistic, not comparing with actual results, and not revising marketing activities as the year progresses. 	False 	p.493 
74. Submitting marketing plans for peer review and feed-back from external marketing experts are good approaches for mitigating the risks associated with marketing plans. 	True 	p.494 
75. The purpose of branding is to distinguish products and services from those of competitors, and make them recognizable by customers. 	True 	p.494 
76. The purpose of branding is to manage the organization’s portfolio of brands in order  to invest in promising brands, and divest brands that are less profitable. 	False 	p.494 
77. The fours significant sources of risk that counter the benefits of branding are: 1) limited brand recognition; 2) inadequate brand portfolio management; 3) undelivered brand promises; and 4) counterfeit products. 	True 	p.494 
78. The fours significant sources of risk that counter the benefits of branding are: 1) limited brand recognition; 2) inadequate financial management of brands; 3) untimely delivery of products and service; and 4) counterfeit products or services. 	False 	p.494 
79. The risk of undelivered brand promises can be mitigated by soliciting input and feedback from customers on their expectations and experiences, training and empowering employees on delivering the brand experience. 	True 	p.497 
80. The risk of undelivered brand promises can be mitigated by divesting declining brands, and lowering customer expectations on existing brands or offering discounts. 	False 	p.497 
81. The risks associated with counterfeit products can be mitigated by monitoring distribution channels, retail stores and the Internet, soliciting legal advise, hiring investigators, and reporting counterfeiters to law enforcement agencies.  	True 	p.498 
82. The risks associated with counterfeit products can be mitigated by creating more distinctive features on products, selling only to authorized distributors and asking retailers to report the counterfeit products that they have purchased. 	False 	p.498 
83. The main risk of pricing is to set a price too high or too low in relation to the value perceived by customers. In both cases, revenues will be sub-optimal. 	True 	p.499 
84. The main risk of pricing is to initially set a price that is too high, and to have to lower it or discount it afterward in order to increase sales. 	False 	p.499 
85. Companies without a strategic and structured approach to pricing may be missing out on profitability gains of three to eight percent according to a reputable study. 	True 	p.500 
86. Only a small minority of large companies do not have a well-defined pricing strategy. 	False 	p.500 
87. Cost-based pricing challenges and risks include misallocation of fixed costs across products and services, and lack of consideration of customer perceptions of value. 	True 	p.501 
88. Cost-based pricing challenges and risks include prices becoming obsolete as costs rise, and not being able to offer discounts in order to maintain profitability. 	False 	p.501 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
89. Competitive pricing challenges and risks include possibly having to renege on market strategies, and lower prices that squeeze profit margins and may lead to price wars. 	True 	p.501 
90. Competitive pricing challenges and risks include prices that are inconsistent with market strategies, and lower prices that squeeze profit margins and lead to price wars. 	True 	p.501 
91. Competitive pricing challenges and risks include having to analyze customer perceptions of value and having to discount products to match perceptions. 	False 	p.501 
92. An omnichannel strategy is the use multiple channels such as websites, smartphone applications, social media, telephone ordering, and in-store shopping. 	True 	p.502-503 
93. An omnichannel strategy is an approach where only one distribution channel such as the Internet is used for reaching out to consumers globally. 	False 	p.502-503 
94. The main risks of an omnichannel strategy are the lack of integration across channels, and the cost of maintaining multiple channels. 	True 	p.502 
95. The main risks of an omnichannel strategy are the reluctance of consumers to switch between channels, and the inability to attract them in-store if they prefer to buy online. 	False 	p.502 
96. The advantages of in-store distribution include the ability for consumers to examine products before buying, and the ability to provide services and facilitate returns. 	True 	p.503 
97. The disadvantages of online distribution include order fulfillment costs and shipping charges, limited ability to establish customer relationships, and more product returns. 	True 	p.503 
98. Surveys indicate that in-store purchases are 4 to 5 times the purchases done online. 	True 	p.503 
99. Promotion is the combination of approaches for communicating products and services, and influencing customer purchase decisions.  	True 	p.504 
100. Promotion is the combination of approaches for offering discounts, rebates and credit terms in order to offer better prices or conditions than competitors. 	False 	p.504 
101. The main risk of promotion is not communicating and reaching out to customers effectively to influence purchasing decisions, or incurring excessive costs in doing so. 	True 	p.505 
102. The main risk of promotion is not recognizing disruptive trends and technologies affecting promotion, and not choosing the right distribution channels. 	False 	p.505 
103. An effective approach to mitigate the risks and sources of risk of promotion is to plan promotional activities using a structured and integrated approach. 	True 	p.505 
104. An effective approach to mitigate the risks and sources of risk of promotion is to develop a social media strategy and application to track online customer behaviors. 	False 	p.505 
105. The main risk of sales is not appropriately influencing buying decisions or incurring excessive costs doing so. 	True 	p.506 
106. The main risk of sales is inadvertently offering discounts to customers who may be willing to pay the full price. 	False 	p.506 
107. Customer relationship management (CRM) is a marketing strategy and process that focus on managing interactions with existing and prospective customers.  	True 	p.506 
108. There is no such thing as an unprofitable customer in sales management. 	False 	p.508-509 
109. Well managed organizations recognize the strategic importance of customer service and make it easy for customers to complain. 	True 	p.509 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 11  
Human Resource Management Risks 
 
 
Review Questions 
 
1. Human resource management 
 
a)	What is human resource management?   (p.528) 
Human resource management is the processes, activities and methods for managing employees to achieve organizational goals.  It involves attracting, developing, motivating, rewarding and retaining employees. Human resource management also includes letting go employees not performing satisfactorily or no longer needed. 
 
b)	What are the objectives of human resource management?  (p.528) 
The purpose of human resources management is to develop and maintain a talented, engaged and performing employee workforce that carries out organizational strategies and operations. (…) The ultimate goal of human resource management is to have dedicated and performing employees that meet organizational needs. 
Establish human resources and working conditions	Build a talented, engaged internal workforce	Maintain performance, relations and continuity
•	Fill jobs with talented people
•	Offer attractive compensation
•	Create a positive and supportive working environment	•	Develop employee competencies and skills
•	Motivate employees
•	Manage teams effectively	•	Help employees perform
to the best of their abilities
•	Ensure business continuity
•	Maintain good relations
•	Human resource planning
•	Recruitment and selection
•	Compensation and benefits
•	Working environment	•	Learning and growth
•	Leadership development
•	Employee engagement
•	Team management	•	Performance management
•	Succession planning
•	Labor relations
•	Workforce adjustments
Goals
Objectives
Scope
 
c)	What are human resource management risks?   (p.528) 
Human resource management risk can be defined as the ability to attract, develop and maintain a talented, engaged and productive employee workforce that meets organizational needs. This definition connects with the goals and objectives of human resource management. 
 
d)	Explain why human resource management is a source of reputation risk.   (p.528) Human resource management is a major source of reputation risk. The manner in which employees are treated has important ramifications. Dissatisfied employees may complain using informal channels such as social media, or may lodge formal complaints with regulatory agencies. (…) Improper or unfair employment practices are viewed negatively by all stakeholders, especially prospective employees, news media, elected officials and the general public. 
 
2. Human resource management functions 
 
a)	Explain the division of responsibility between the managers and the human resource management function, and the rationale for the division.   (p.529) 
Human resource management functions advise on human resource policies and processes, and provide assistance for carrying them out, but are not responsible for the decisions made when applying them. Managers with employees reporting to them are responsible for managing their employees, and by extension for all human resource decisions applicable to their areas of responsibility. This division of responsibility is essential for maintaining clear accountabilities. Human resource management professionals are responsible for the soundness of their advice and the effectiveness of their services, but managers remain accountable for employee decisions. Otherwise, managers could not be held accountable for the performance of their function or unit. 
 
b)	What are the benefits and risks of centralizing human resources management?   (p.529) 
•	Benefits - Centralization can alleviate the burden of carrying out transactional activities such as recruitment, and the management of compensation and benefits. Centralization also helps ensure consistency of management practices, and compliance with laws and regulations.  
•	Risks -  Centralization often results in an excessive focus on policies and procedures, to the detriment of strategic and value added services. This tendency creates higher administrative costs. The overemphasis on procedures is often a source of discontent for managers. 
 
c)	Outline three attributes of strategic human resource management.   (p.530) Students may choose from the following:  
•	Customer services mindset - the function exists to provide support services 
•	Automation of routine processes - processes should not be a burden for line managers 
•	Assignment of responsibilities to managers - training of line managers on hrm processes 
•	Guidance and support for managers - advice and support to line managers 
•	Identification of problems and solutions - analyze problems, propose innovative solutions 
•	Monitoring of external trends and conditions - stay up to date, analyze what competitors do 
•	Advice to senior executives on strategic issues - advise on trends and issues affecting hrm 
 
3. Human resource planning 
 
a)	What is human resource planning?   (p.530) 
Human resource planning is the process of determining organizational needs for human resources, and deciding how those needs will be met. It involves analyzing job requirements for the short and long terms, and ensuring that jobs are filled with people who have the right mix of competencies and skills. The main purpose of human resource planning is to hire and develop current and future employees to meet organizational needs. 
 
b)	What are the consequences of not planning human resources?   (p.531) 
The absence of human resource planning makes organizations vulnerable at executing their strategies, and meeting customer demand for products and services. These vulnerabilities translate into risks of lower revenues and profitability, and dissatisfied customers and stakeholders. Competitors more adept at planning their human resource needs can achieve greater market share and develop a competitive advantage. 
 
c)	Explain two challenges associated with forecasting human resource needs.   (p.531) 
•	Future needs analysis - many internal and external variables to consider. 
•	Current workforce information - often scattered, limited, not up-to-date, etc. 
 
d)	What are three strategies for leveraging the existing employee workforce?   (p.532) 
•	Learning and growth - education and training programs, incentives to develop skills • Leadership and development - talent identification, leadership programs, mentoring, etc. 
•	Promotions and transfers - new responsibilities, diversification of knowledge and skills 
 
e)	What is a good approach for focusing human resource planning?   (p.533) 
A good approach for deciding where and how to focus human resource planning is to categorize employees in groups, based on the uniqueness of their skills, and their importance to organizational strategies.  (Figure 11.3, p.533)  
4. Equal employment opportunity 
 
a)	Define equal employment opportunity.   (p.533) 
Equal employment opportunity refers to the obligation of employers to provide a fair chance of employment and promotion to people of designated groups. These groups are known as protected classes. In the United States and Canada, it is illegal to discriminate employment opportunities on the basis of race, religion, national origin, gender, age, and physical or mental disability. Persons from designated groups must be duly considered for employment opportunities, and be given a fair chance of employment and promotion. (…) State or provincial laws may also forbid employment discrimination on the basis of marital status, sexual orientation, physical appearance, criminal record and political affiliation. 
 
b)	Explain the difference between intentional and unintentional discrimination.   (p.534) 
•	Intentional discrimination - Takes place when designated groups are specifically excluded from consideration.  Reasons may include bias or racism, but may also include reasons related to job aspects (e.g. fashion store that hires models, Thai restaurant that hires Thai servers). 
•	Unintentional discrimination - Occurs when there is no direct intent to discriminate, but when employment policies or standards may discriminate from the perspective of designated groups (e.g. requirement for physical strength, requirement for professional qualifications). 
•	Such hiring criteria may be challenged, in which case the employer has the burden of proof. 
 
c)	How can the risks of equal employment be mitigated?   (p.534) 
•	Maintain knowledge of equal employment opportunity laws. 
•	Adopt a comprehensive employment opportunity policy that meets compliance obligations. 
•	Provide advice to managers regarding administrative policies and compliance obligations. 
•	Obtain legal advice when practicing intentional discrimination, or when using hiring criteria that may be perceived as discriminatory by protected groups. 
•	Be prepared to justify or defend hiring practices and standards with sound arguments. 
•	Analyze the existing workforce to determine if designated groups are underrepresented. 
•	Adopt employment equity goals and objectives, and develop a plan for making it happen. 
•	Promote the organization as an equal opportunity employer when advertising jobs. 
•	Advertise jobs in media and locations susceptible from attracting designated groups. 
•	Monitor progress of the plan and results achieved. 
 
d)	Explain what is needed to ensure that qualified employees can be hired and rewarded without contravening to equal employment opportunity guidelines.   (p.535) 
Hiring qualified employees, and rewarding them on the basis of job performance is entirely legitimate. Legislation does not prevent employers from applying relevant hiring criteria, and rewarding outstanding employees with salary increases and promotions. Similarly, candidates without proper qualifications should not be hired, and underperforming employees can be penalized or disciplined for inadequate job performance. From an employment equity perspective, the hiring criteria must be relevant to job requirements, and the rewards or penalties must relate to actual job performance. Employment decisions should not otherwise be discriminatory. 
 
5. Workplace diversity 
 
a)	What are the benefits of workplace diversity?   (p.535-536) 
•	Organizations tend to achieve better results with greater workplace diversity. 
•	Prevents from becoming insular and out of touch with the diverse customer base. 
•	Helps employees see things differently and challenge one another. 
•	Decisions can take a bit longer but are better informed. 
 
b)	Why do diversity programs fail and how can the risk of failure be mitigated?   (p.536) Coercive approaches or mechanisms that force managers to increase diversity within their units often have the opposite effect. A better approach is to positively engage managers in recognizing the benefits of diversity, and working with them to find solutions for improving diversity. Making managers part of the solution makes them perceive that they are trusted and empowered. These approaches are consistent with change management principles. Creating a change imperative, and positively engaging participants in finding solutions, are generally more effective than trying to force change using [coercive] authority. 
 
6. Recruitment and selection 
 
a)	Outline the recruitment and selection processes with a diagram.   (p.536) 
 
 
b)	Why is recruitment and selection a good investment of time and effort?   (p.536-537) 
•	Making bad hiring decisions can be a huge problem when poor individual performance affects organizational productivity, employee morale, and customer satisfaction. 
•	Employees may leave (are more likely to leave) if they are not a good fit for their job. 
•	It is much more cost-effective in the long run to hire individuals who are a good fit. 
 
c)	What is job analysis and why is it important for human resource management?   (p.537) 
•	What it is - Job analysis is the collection and analysis of information about the characteristics of a job, namely the roles and responsibilities of the person occupying the job, and the competencies, skills and abilities required for the job. 
•	Why it is important: 
o	Gives the necessary content for advertising jobs, attracting qualified individuals, and developing criteria for evaluating candidates objectively. 
o	Helps avoid complaints of discrimination (criteria to evaluate candidates objectively). o Provides an inventory of all the types of jobs needed in an organization. 
o	Helps determine compensation levels, training and development needs, assess employee performance in relation to job requirements, and justify dismissal for poor performance. 
 
d)	What are the risks of recruitment and how can they be mitigated?   (p.537-539) 
•	Risks - Overlook sources that can generate qualified candidates, and not generate enough [good] candidates for consideration. In both cases, the organization may be deprived of talent, and may find it difficult to maintain a competitive edge. 
•	Mitigation - Identifying the right sources for advertising jobs, and using enough sources to generate a sufficient number of qualified candidates mitigate recruitment risks. Need to consider internal and external recruiting sources, and analyze the performance of the sources in relation to applications received, qualified candidates, ratio of offers extended, etc. 
 
 
 
 
e)	What are the benefits and risks of job application forms?   (p.539) 
Benefits: 
•	Facilitate the gathering and comparison of applicant information 
•	Provide information that can be tailored to job selection criteria 
•	Help detect possible inconsistencies with resume information 
•	Can request information not available in resumes such as references 
•	Help obtain formal consent for reference checks and security checks • Should be signed-off by applicants to confirm the validity of information Risks: 
•	The information and consents requested on job application forms must be relevant for job requirements, and must not otherwise include questions that invade personal privacy, or that are contrary to equal employment opportunity guidelines. 
 
f)	What is negligent hiring and how can this risk be mitigated?   (p.540-541) 
•	Negligent hiring - Employers may be sued by employees or other stakeholders for negligent hiring, particularly in cases of abuse, injury, theft or damaged property. Negligence is the failure to exercise a reasonable amount of care. It applies to hiring decisions. Claimants can argue that employers failed to exercise due care in selecting employees unfit for their jobs. Such claims may allege incompetence, lack of experience, and past behavioral problems.  
•	Mitigation - Although checking and testing are sources of equal employment opportunity risk, not checking and testing can expose an organization to negligence lawsuits. Conducting reference checks (past employers, experience, behaviors) and background checks (education, professional accreditations, criminal records) protect organizations against negligent hiring. 
 
g)	Why is hiring an overqualified candidate not necessarily a good decision?   (p.541) 
Overqualified employees often end up dissatisfied, especially if advancement opportunities are limited. (…) Overqualification may cause disengagement and turnover, which negatively affect organizational performance. Accordingly, hiring the most qualified candidate is not necessarily a good decision. Selection decisions should be based on job fit [and employee aspirations]. 
 
h)	How should the risk of implied employment contracts be mitigated?   (p.542) 
It should be clear to prospective employees that their employment is at-will, meaning that the employer or employee may terminate the employment at any time with proper advance notice. The at-will-employment principle should be explained to candidates during interviews, and should be clearly stated in employee handbooks. Employees should not be under the impression that they have explicit or continued employment rights (e.g. if their performance is good). Such impressions may cause problems in the event of lay-offs due work shortages or recessions. 
 
i)	What is onboarding and why is it a risk mitigation strategy?   (p.543) 
•	Description -  Onboarding is the process of integrating and acclimatizing new employees into an organization, and providing the necessary information, tools, resources and support to help them be successful and productive. (…) The purpose of onboarding is to create a sense of belonging, and make employees engaged and productive. 
•	Risk mitigation - Studies indicate that thirty to fifty percent of new employees quit their job within the first six or seven months of employment. (…) Only twelve percent of employees strongly agree that their organization does a great job of onboarding new employees. (…) Organizations mitigate the risk of new employee departures with effective onboarding that makes new employees feel welcome, important, valued and part of a team. 
 
 
 
 
7. Compensation and benefits 
 
a)	What are the risks of compensation and benefits?   (p.543) 
The purposes of compensation and benefits are to attract, motivate and retain employees. The risks associated with compensation and benefits are two-fold. If compensation and benefits are not competitive, organizations may find it difficult to attract, motivate and retain qualified employees. Alternatively, if compensation and benefits are overly generous, organizations have excessive costs, lower profitability and less competitiveness. 
 
b)	Explain three decision-making factors for compensation and benefits.   (p.544) 
Students may choose from the following - internal factors: 
•	Strategies - need people with competencies and skills relevant to organizational strategies 
•	Relative job value - jobs need to be properly valued and compensated (pay equity) 
•	Employee satisfaction - right mix of compensation and benefits for attraction and retention 
•	Collective agreements - favorable [and fair] agreements with labor unions, avoid strikes 
Students may choose from the following - external factors: 
•	Legal requirements - need to be met (e.g. minimum wage, overtime, pay equity, benefits, etc.) 
•	Labor markets - Adjust compensation levels for attraction and retention, cost of living, etc. 
•	Competitor practices - Attract and retain good employees, or less experienced employees 
 
c)	What is job evaluation and why is it important?   (p.545) 
•	Description - Job evaluation is the process of determining the relative worth of jobs.  The purpose of job evaluation is to determine appropriate compensation levels for every job.  
•	Importance - Job evaluation helps ensure pay equity. Employees need to sense that their contributions are appropriately valued relative to others. Employees are dissatisfied when they perceive that they are not adequately compensated. They may also complain or take legal action if compensation levels appear discriminatory or unfair. 
 
d)	Explain three risks of incentive compensation and how to manage them.   (p.546) Students may choose from the following: 
Risk 	Description 	Mitigation 
Loss of motivation 	Objectives too difficult to achieve. Lack of fairness. 	Set realistic targets. 
Get feed-back from employees 
Excessive costs 	Overly generous. 
Objectives too easy to achieve. 	Benchmark incentive plans. 
Isolate effects of changes in conditions. 
Selfish behaviors 	Conflicting objectives: 
-  Personal vs group vs organization 	Alignment of objectives. 
Monitoring of employee behaviors. 
Gaming 
the system 	Decisions or actions focused on the shortterm, detrimental to the long term. 	Adopt multiple performance objectives to discourage unwanted behaviors. 
Excessive risk-taking 	Taking excessive risks to achieve objectives tied to compensation. 	Link risk appetite and tolerance indicators to incentive compensation. 
Free rider effects 	Group incentives that reward good and bad individual performers. 	Make individual performance a precondition to receiving group incentives. 
Negative perceptions 	Senior executive compensation levels that are criticized as overly generous. 	Communicate the rationale. 
Benchmark to industry standards. 
 
e)	What are the risks of benefits and how can they be mitigated?   (p.547-548) 
•	Risks - Adding benefits indiscriminately over time, resulting in a costly patchwork of benefits that many employees may not necessarily want. This situation leads to excessive costs and employee dissatisfaction if they contribute to benefits that they do not value. 
•	Mitigation - Consult employees and tailor benefits to varying needs. Establish a benefits management committee responsible for managing benefits strategically. Determine whether the benefits should be self-funded or insured. Avoid reimbursing healthcare expenses in full. 
 
f)	Explain the risk of defined benefit pension plan and how to mitigate it.   (p.548) 
•	Risk - Defined benefit plans are those where employers guarantee monthly retirement payments based on years of employment. They are a major source of risk for employers because employers assume the risk of pension investment returns and potential shortfalls. 
•	Mitigation - Many organizations no longer offer defined benefit plans, and shift existing employees to defined contribution plans, where employees assume the risk of pension plan investment returns, without guarantee of a specific pension based on years of service. 
 
8. Training and development 
 
a)	What is the difference between training and development?   (p.548) 
•	Training - learning activities that help employees improve their current job performance.  
•	Development - Learning activities that augment or broaden employee competencies and skills for future jobs,  such as those involving new responsibilities.  
 
b)	Why is it important to manage training and development strategically?   (p.549-550) 
•	Organizations can spend hundreds of millions of dollars annually with limited results. 
•	Employees who acquire new competencies and skills contribute to organizational renewal. 
•	Lack of training and development leads to organizational decline and potential failure. 
•	Positive correlation between employee learning and organizational revenues and profitability. 
 
c)	Briefly explain the steps for managing training and development strategically.   (p.550-551) • Assess learning needs - identify based on current and future strategies and operational needs. 
•	Define learning objectives - engage managers and staff to define relevant learning objectives. 
•	Develop learning program – develop programs adapted to individual employees and groups in consultation with employees, managers and training and development experts. 
•	Deliver learning program – colleges and universities, corporate education facilities, courses delivered by professionals or by employees whose job is to train others, etc. 
•	Assess learning results – evaluate results using performance indicators and measures, and assess the extent to which learning objectives are met, and learning needs satisfied. 
•	Refine learning program – revise programs based on the assessment of results, identify improvement opportunities, reassess learning needs and update objectives. 
 
9. Working environment 
 
a)	Explain why deficient values and ethics are a source of risk.   (p.551-552) 
•	Improper employee behaviors, decisions and actions occur. 
•	Causes employees to complain, disengage and leave the organization. 
•	Suppliers and customers may also complain and no longer want to do business. 
•	Tarnishes organizational reputation. 
•	May lead legal issues (e.g. mistreatment, corruption). 
•	Employee misconduct can be as much as ten time higher. 
 
b)	Outline how to address deficiencies related to values and ethics.   (p.552) 
Forceful actions are needed to address deficiencies related to values and ethics: 
•	Drafting clear value statements, and ethical guidelines or codes of conduct 
•	Screening all new employees to ensure that they have the right character 
•	Mandating that all employees attend training on values and ethics 
•	Outlining examples of how values and ethics apply in each operational area 
•	Making values and ethics expectations part of employee performance evaluations 
•	Recognizing and promoting individuals who are role models for others to follow 
•	Monitoring behaviors, and encouraging employees to report breaches of conduct 
•	Taking disciplinary action against individuals acting contrary to expectations 
•	Terminating employees who do not exemplify values and ethics 
Strong leadership is needed from the chief executive officer to communicate the required changes in organizational culture and behaviors. Because changing a problem culture is very difficult, chief executives must leave absolutely no doubt regarding their commitment and determination to make every effort for effecting culture and behavioral changes. To make sure that changes are taken seriously, chief executive officers must constantly personify the values and ethics with key messages, and more importantly with visible and forceful actions. These actions may include terminating senior executives and managers who do not exemplify the desired values and ethics. 
 
c)	What is workplace incivility?   (p.554) 
Workplace incivility can be described as disrespectful, inappropriate, abusive or threatening behavior that includes but is not limited to harassment and bullying. Being intentionally ignored, undermined by colleagues, or belittled are also examples of incivility.  Examples of harassment include condescending remarks, offensive or diminishing jokes, verbal abuse, intimidation, threats, unwelcome invitations, unnecessary physical contact, and physical assault.  A subcomponent of harassment is bullying, which is the mistreatment of one or more persons by another person or by a group. Forms of bullying include verbal abuse and offensive behaviors that are humiliating, intimidating or threatening, or that otherwise interfere with the ability of an employee to enjoy a peaceful and pleasant working environment. 
 
d)	Explain three techniques for preventing or correcting workplace incivility.   (p.555) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Management policies - how to report issues, address problems, sanction behaviors 
•	Group norms - managers state how employees are expected to work collaboratively 
•	Awareness training - mandatory training to all employees, examples of unacceptable behavior 
•	Monitoring - survey employees formally and informally, investigate issues reported • Complaint process - trusted process, no fear of reprisal, options for reporting issues 
•	Resolution mechanisms - investigation, remedial action, mediation, arbitration, etc. 
•	Employee sanctions - formal apologies, leave without pay, demotions, terminations. 
•	Exit interviews - solicit information on workplace incivility, identify recurring issues. 
 
e)	What is the principle of natural justice and why is it important?   (p.555) 
Employees who make complaints are entitled to a fair and timely hearing, a bias-free proceeding, the ability to present arguments, and a timely decision and resolution of their complaint. These are implied obligations that organizations must follow. Court decisions state that natural justice principles supersede organizational policies and procedures, which means that policies and procedures must be in compliance with these principles (otherwise they are not valid). Not applying these principles may result in paying legal fines and damages to employees. Court cases are public information that inevitably harm organizational reputation. 
 
10. Employee engagement 
 
a)	What is employee engagement?   (p.557) 
The extent that employees are motivated, satisfied and committed to their work and organization. A high level of engagement involves being fulfilled by a strong connection with work and colleagues, feeling like an important contributor, and enjoying opportunities to learn.  
 
b)	What are the effects of disengaged employees?   (p.558) 
Actively disengaged employees are those who are unhappy with their work, resentful about their employer, and determined to leave. These employees sometimes act in ways that are detrimental to their organization. According to Gallup, actively disengaged employees are more likely to have a negative influence on their colleagues, miss workdays, and drive customers away. Actively disengaged employees are also more likely to steal from their employer.  
 
c)	Explain three factors that create employee engagement.   (p.558-559) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Sense of purpose - attachment to mission, clarity of expectations, knowledge of contribution 
•	Meaningful work - jobs that meet aspirations, job expansion (growth) opportunities 
•	Proper management - direction, helpful supervision, empowerment, no micromanagement 
•	Training and development - become good at what they do, sense of accomplishment 
•	Team leadership - leaders carefully selected and trained to manage and motivate teams 
•	Team cohesiveness - team that functions well, shared values, sense of purpose, commitment 
•	Trust in the organization - executive messages and actions consistent with values and ethics 
•	Flexible work arrangements - work-life balance, personal situation, improve productivity 
 
11. Managerial leadership 
 
a)	What is managerial leadership?   (p.559) 
[Managerial] leadership is the ability to inspire and direct people to reach organizational goals.   It is an influence relationship that helps achieve a shared vision, purpose or outcome.   
 
b)	What causes leadership training and development programs to be ineffective?   (p.559) Only forty-three percent of chief executives are confident that training [and development] efforts will result in better leadership. Part of the problem is that there is limited consensus regarding what makes a good leader. Leadership training and development programs typically address a broad range of issues, often not adapted to individual needs. In addition, many managers have difficulty moving from theory to practice. In some cases, they do not know how implement what they have learned. In other cases, they are unwilling to change. 
 
c)	Explain three attributes that make effective leaders.   (p.560) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Modesty - make subordinates at ease to speak up and express their views. 
•	Results orientation - clarity on what to achieve and (smart) objectives set accordingly. 
•	Clear agenda for meetings - conduct meetings effectively, avoid unnecessary discussions. 
•	Perspective - seek different perspective from team members before making decisions. 
•	Listening - actively listen, all suggestions, opinions are encouraged and valued. 
•	Confidence - analyze, no rush to judgment, not making decisions too quickly. 
•	Delegation - provide direction and delegate effectively, coach, do not micromanage. 
•	Support - build trust, demonstrate a sincere interest, provide the necessary resources. 
 
d)	Outline an effective technique for evaluating leadership abilities.   (p.560) 
An effective approach for evaluating and developing leaders is to define the desirable attributes of an effective leader. With this approach, organizations communicate to their managers what they are looking for in terms of leadership, and they can set expectations accordingly. (…)  A 360o [leadership] performance feed-back process can be used to obtain [a comprehensive] assessment of the leadership abilities of individual managers based on the input of superiors, peers and subordinates in relation to each of the attributes. 
 
 
12. Employee teams 
 
a)	What are common issues affecting team performance?   (p.561) 
Some teams operate effectively, while others are dysfunctional. Some teams do not achieve their purpose satisfactorily and need to be dismantled. Common issues affecting the performance of teams include lack of alignment to a specific goal, unclear roles and responsibilities among team members, power struggles, personality differences and conflicts of interest.   
 
b)	How are these common issues normally managed?   (p.561) 
These common issues can usually be managed by a good manager or team leader. 
 
c)	Explain three risks that may affect teams that seem to operate effectively.   (p.561) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Silent views - avoid expressing views that are inconsistent with those of others. 
•	Hidden knowledge - not enough effort to find out what everybody knows. 
•	Amplifying errors - too much optimism in the time required to complete tasks. 
•	Cascading answers - everyone associates with what the leader says or remains silent. 
•	Risky shift - tendency of teams to assume more risks than what individuals would do. 
•	Lost cause - tendency to double down instead of admitting failures and cutting losses. 
 
d)	What are the various dimensions to consider when designing a team?   (p.562) Defining a clear purpose, mandate or direction - goals, smart objectives. 
Giving it the right structure for effective alignment - see design dimensions below Determining the right mix of employees - competencies, skills, diversity, etc. 
 
Design Dimensions		Design Options
Assignment
	Work Team	Problem Solving Team
	Assigned to a process or activities	Assigned to a project or initiative
Leadership
	Managed Team	Self-managed Team
	Headed by a manager or team leader	Without a manager or team leader
Location
	Co-located Team	Virtual Team
	Members located in the same place	Members geographically dispersed
Background
	Specialized Team	Cross-functional Team
	Members have the same background	Members have different backgrounds
Size
	Small Team	Large Team
	Less than 6 or 7 members	More than 6 or 7 members
 
e)	Outline five techniques for managing teams effectively.   (p.563) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Define the purpose - The team purpose or mandate should be clear to everyone. 
•	Establish smart objectives - Smart objectives help maintain a focus on key activities. 
•	Analyze team design - Assess the team design and make changes where appropriate. 
•	Assign roles and responsibilities - Everyone should be clear about expectations. 
•	Provide training - Analyze the collective and individual needs, and provide training. 
•	Secure adequate resources - Make sure that the team has the resources that it needs. 
•	Manage meetings - Define the purpose of each meeting and focus the agenda. 
•	Encourage open debate - Make everyone speak before expressing your own views. 
•	Explore alternative options - Analyze alternative options before making a decision. 
•	Integrate with other groups - Understand the needs and concerns of other groups. 
•	Measure performance - Develop performance targets and measure performance. 
•	Reward team success - Provide incentives, and reward members for team results. 
13. Performance management 
 
a)	What is performance management?   (p.563) 
In the context of human resources, performance management can be defined as a process that clarifies expectations, sets objectives, evaluates achievements, and provides feed-back for improving employee performance. 
 
b)	What are the two significant sources of risk affecting performance management?   (p.563) Performance management has two significant sources of risk. In some cases, organizations do not have an effective process for managing employee performance. In other cases, managers are not properly trained for managing performance and delivering feed-back. 
 
c)	Explain what is the key to effective performance management.   (p.564) 
The key is to define expectations and performance objectives up front. Once there is a good understanding and agreement about what is expected and what needs to be achieved 
(individually and collectively), the performance management process mostly becomes a matter of collecting relevant information and effectively communicating with individual employees and teams. When employees have a clear understanding of what is expected and what they need to accomplish, they are more receptive to feed-back. 
 
d)	Outline two performance appraisal methods and their challenges.   (p.565) Students may choose from the following: 
Method 	Challenges 
Supervisor appraisal 	May have too many employees reporting to them. 
Many not be overly familiar with the work of each employee. 
Self appraisal 	Many employees tend to inflate their performance assessment. 
Embellished assessments complicates discussions with supervisors. 
Team appraisal 	Everyone must have a clear understanding of the roles and responsibilities of others and how they are expected to contribute. 
360o Feed-back 	Multiple perspective which may be contradictory.  More complex and time consuming to administer 
 
e)	How can legal issues be avoided regarding performance appraisals?   (p.565) 
•	Performance standards or criteria developed from expectations and objectives must be clear (not vague), and must be job related to be valid. Employees need to be informed in advance of the standards or criteria that will be used to assess their performance.  
•	Managers should document specific examples of traits, behaviors or results when standards or criteria are not met. The examples must be discussed with individual employees.  
•	Employees must have the opportunity to express their views or disagreements fairly, and be given a reasonable amount of time for improving their performance if it is not satisfactory. 
 
f)	Why is performance management training important?   (p.566) 
In many cases, managers lack the skills to appropriately manage employee performance. 
Conversely, many employees do not react very well to feed-back, even when it is constructive. (…) Training on the performance management process helps resolve these issues, because it demystifies the process, and explains the roles and responsibilities of managers and staff regarding performance management. Training also helps managers deliver feed-back objectively and constructively. In addition, it helps employees accept feed-back positively. 
 
 
 
14. Discipline 
 
a)	What is discipline?   (p.567) 
Discipline can be defined as taking managerial actions to address unacceptable employee behaviors and performance issues. It is usually administered progressively. In early stages, it involves warnings, mandatory counselling and training. In later stages, it involves suspensions with or without pay, and termination or dismissal. 
 
b)	What common behavioral issues require discipline?   (p.567) 
•	Faulty attendance - arriving late, unexplained absences, excessively long breaks, etc. 
•	Unsatisfactory performance - not being responsive to requests from superiors or colleagues. 
•	Misconduct - insubordination, language, harassment, bullying, intoxication, violence. 
•	Dishonesty - unauthorized use of assets, theft, falsifications, damage to property. 
 
c)	Why is it important not to let performance issues linger?   (p.568) 
It is important not to let performance issues linger. Employees do not appreciate having to do additional work because their colleagues are absent or underperform. Employees may complain, loose motivation, or even leave if other employees are not doing the work they are supposed to do. Few things demotivate employees faster than tolerating and retaining low performers. 
 
d)	How should rules of conduct be defined and communicated to employees?   (p.568) 
Organizations need to define rules of conduct as part of their employment terms and conditions. They do so with policies such as employee handbooks and codes of conduct. Organizations also need to communicate these rules to employees on regular basis, and make them accessible for easy reference. (…) Some organizations make employees sign-off on codes of conduct, job descriptions and personal plans as proof that they are aware and in agreement with them. Signoffs may not be well perceived by some employees, however they make employees accountable. 
 
e)	Outline the steps of the disciplinary process.   (p.568) 
 
 
f)	What is the difference between progressive and positive discipline?   (p.568-569) 
•	Progressive discipline - applying disciplinary measures progressively (e.g. verbal warning, written warning, suspension with or without pay, demotion or dismissal). 
•	Positive discipline - engage employees to acknowledge that they have a performance issue, and work with them to correct the problem. If the problem persists, the employee is asked to take a leave of absence and come back with a resolution or submit their resignation. 
 
15. Dismissal 
 
a)	What is dismissal?   (p.569) 
Dismissal is the termination of employees for just cause, such as completely unacceptable behavior, or significant performance issues that persist despite the application of disciplinary actions. Dismissal is commonly known as firing. 
b)	How can employers mitigate the risk of legal challenges to dismissal?   (p.569) 
From a legal standpoint, the onus of proof for just cause rests with the employer. Accordingly, managers should never dismiss an employee without getting advice from human resource professionals regarding documentation requirements. Employees may legally challenge their dismissal if they believe that there is no valid reason. Employees who win court cases for wrongful dismissal may have to be reinstated in their employment and given retroactive pay, or may otherwise be awarded damages set by the courts. 
 
c)	What is constructive dismissal?   (p.570) 
Changing the job of an employee without their consent may be interpreted as constructive dismissal by a court of justice. 
 
d)	In what instances may employees claim constructive dismissal?   (p.570) 
Employees who resign because their job conditions were changed without their consent may file legal claims for constructive dismissal. Examples of constructive dismissal include major changes in job functions, a demotion, a demand for resignation, and a forced transfer. The laws relating to constructive dismissal are technical and complex. It is important to seek legal advice when altering terms and conditions of employment 
 
e)	Describe the approach that should be used when dismissing an employee.   (p.570) A carefully planned meeting should be used to announce dismissal to an employee.  
The employee must be treated with dignity and respect. The meeting should be held in private, and should only include the immediate supervisor and a human resource professional. The discussion should be straightforward, tactful and without argumentation. The human resource professional should go over the severance arrangements, and obtain the signatures required. (…) If the employee reacts angrily, the supervisor and human resource professional must remain calm and deescalate the situation. They should immediately alert security if the employee becomes hostile. For safety reasons, it is standard practice to escort dismissed employees to their desk to get their personal belongings, and then escort them outside of the building. 
 
16. Succession planning 
 
a)	What is succession planning?   (p.570) 
Succession planning is the identification and development of employees who can replace others, in the event that those other employees are no longer available. It is about making long term development plans to fill human resource needs. 
 
b)	What are the consequences of ineffective succession planning?   (p.570) 
The main purpose of succession planning is to ensure business continuity by mitigating what is commonly known as key person risk. Key person risk exists when there is an overreliance on some individuals for critical organizational functions. Succession planning also applies to entire management functions or business units. For instance, a business unit may have many employees retiring at the same time, in which case there is a need to plan succession for the entire unit. 
 
c)	Explain talent management and cross training.   (p.571) 
•	Talent management - Identifying employees with a high potential, and developing them for current and future jobs within the organization. High potential employees are invited to develop a career plan that links with organizational strategies and operational needs. 
•	Cross training - Making employees learn the jobs of others in order that employees can replace one another when someone is absent. Employees learn to do the jobs of others in addition to their own. The benefits of cross training go beyond succession planning. 
 
 
d)	Explain what is a replacement chart.   (p.571) 
A replacement chart that indicates which employees can replace others in the event that positions or jobs become vacant. At least one replacement employee should be identified for every important position or job. A color coding system can be used to indicate the readiness of the designated employee to act as a replacement. For example, green may indicate full readiness, yellow may indicate partial readiness, and red may indicate limited readiness. The color coding helps identify where succession gaps exist, and where action plans are needed to address them. 
 
 
Other Short Answer Questions 
 
1.	Explain why employees are an important organizational asset.   (p.528) 
Employees are the most important organizational asset. They are also the most complex and challenging to manage. It is often said that great strategies, processes or products can be copied by competitors. However, great employees are much more difficult to match.  Organizations develop a competitive edge by filling jobs with talented people who are highly motivated and committed to organizational success. Human resource management helps develop this kind of competitive edge.  
 
2.	Explain why human resource management is a source of compliance risk.   (p.528) 
Human resource management is subject to detailed and complex employment laws and regulations regarding the treatment of employees. Accordingly, human resource management is also a source of compliance risk. Improper or unfair employment practices are viewed negatively by all stakeholders, especially prospective employees, news media, elected officials and the general public. 
 
3.	Explain the human resource planning approach using a diagram.   (p.531) 
 
 
4.	What happens when no reliable forecast of human resource needs can be developed, or when no clear picture of existing human resources is available.   (p.532) 
When no reliable forecast can be developed, or when no clear picture of existing human resources is available, organizations are in reactive mode. A reactive mode means that the employee workforce is never close to optimal, and that human resource planning is always catching-up to existing needs.  
 
5.	Explain why human resource plans need to be updated on a regular basis.   (p.533) What approach can be taken for keeping plans up-to-date? 
•	Need to update - Plans need to be updated on a regular basis as external environment conditions change and organizational strategies evolve. In complex and dynamic environments, plans can quickly become obsolete. Management mechanisms are needed to ensure that plans are reviewed on regular basis, and reconfirmed as valid or updated when required. 
•	Approach for keeping up-to-date - A planning committee of senior executives can be established for this purpose. In this case, the role of the planning committee is to ensure that organizational plans continue to be relevant, or to direct and oversee updates when required.  
6.	Explain the difference between employment equity and workplace diversity.   (p.533-536) 
•	Employment equity - Refers to the obligation of employers to provide a fair chance of employment and promotion to people of designated groups. These groups are known as protected classes.  They include race, religion, national origin, gender, age, and physical or mental disability, marital status, sexual orientation, physical appearance, criminal record and political affiliation. 
•	Workplace diversity -  Refers to the assortment of employee differences, perceptions, ideas and behaviors that characterize a workplace. A workplace is highly diversified when it includes employees of many different groups. Workplace diversity is broader because it includes other dimensions such as background, education level, family status, language, personality types, etc. 
 
7.	What is the difference between recruitment and selection?   (p.536) 
•	Recruitment - Finding qualified individuals and motivating them to accept job offers. 
•	Selection - Determining which individuals best meet job requirements and should receive an offer. 
 
8.	What are the outputs of job analysis?   (p.537) 
•	Job description - explains the job (roles and responsibilities). 
•	Job specification - outlines the qualifications required (education, experience, skills, abilities). 
 
9.	What are the advantages and drawbacks of internal recruiting?   (p.539) 
•	Advantages - Employee capabilities and past performance are known or can be easily verified. 
Process is quicker and less expensive.  Motivates existing employees (advancement, promotion). 
•	Drawbacks - Moving an employee to another job typically creates a vacancy in their existing job. Continual internal recruiting also lead to a lack of diversity (new ideas, fresh perspectives, etc.) 
 
10.	What are the main risks of selection?  (p.539) 
The main risks of selection are to overlook qualified applicants, and select applicants who are not a good fit for the jobs to fill. Employees who are not a good fit for their job tend to be less motivated. They can become disappointed, disengaged and frustrated. They may also require more supervision and training if their job is too demanding for them. Finally, they are also more likely to leave. 
 
11.	What two common checks should be conducted as part of the selection process?   (p.540) 
•	Reference checks - contact previous employers to verify past employment and experience. 
•	Background checks - very education degrees, professional memberships, criminal record. 
 
12.	What approaches help limit complaints related to employee testing?   (p.541) 
•	Ensure that testing is relevant to job context. 
•	Obtain legal advice to ensure that employment tests are defensible. 
•	Obtain written consent from candidates when conducting interview. 
•	Outline continued testing requirements as part of job offers. 
 
13.	Explain why compensation and benefits need to be managed strategically.   (p.544) 
•	Attractive compensation and benefits are key for attraction and retention. 
•	Compensation and benefits have to instill the right employee motivations. 
•	Need to maintain the right balance between employee satisfaction and affordability of costs. 
 
14.	What are the consequences of not using compensation ranges for job evaluation?   (p.545) Most organizations value salaried positions using compensation ranges that take into account employee competencies and skills. (…) This approach motivates employees to acquire [additional] competencies and skills relevant to their job. The consequences of not using compensation ranges are that employees may not be adequately rewarded for having more qualifications, and may not be motivated to upgrade their qualifications over time. 
 
15.	Why is incentive compensation also called pay at risk?   (p.545) 
Incentive compensation is sometimes called pay at risk, because the payment of the compensation is uncertain, namely contingent upon the achievement of individual, group or organizational performance objectives. Examples of incentive compensation include sales commissions, performance bonuses, profit sharing, and stock options. 
 
16.	What are two effective approaches for mitigating incentive compensation risks?   (p.546) 
•	Alignment of objectives - employees and group objectives tied to organizational objectives, using a combination of indicators akin to a balanced scorecard, making it difficult for employees or groups to act in ways that are detrimental to the organization as a whole. 
•	Audit of incentive compensation - independent audit of incentive compensation risks and mitigation strategies, ideally commissioned by the audit or compensation committee of the board of directors, and conducted by external experts hired by the board. 
 
17.	Explain how employee learning results should be assessed and programs revised.   (p.551) 
•	Assess learning results – Training and development efforts should be evaluated using performance indicators and measures. Indicators should include employee and organizational performance results. Main considerations: learning objectives met, learning needs satisfied. 
•	Refine learning program – Programs revised based on the assessment of results. Manager and staff feed-back are important for identifying improvement opportunities. Organizations also need to reassess their learning needs over time, and update their learning objectives accordingly. 
 
18.	How should chief executive officers address deficiencies in values and ethics?   (p.552) 
Strong leadership is needed from the chief executive officer to communicate the required changes in organizational culture and behaviors. Because changing a problem culture is very difficult, chief executives must leave absolutely no doubt regarding their commitment and determination to make every effort for effecting culture and behavioral changes. To make sure that changes are taken seriously, chief executive officers must constantly personify the values and ethics with key messages, and more importantly with visible and forceful actions. These actions may include terminating senior executives and managers who do not exemplify the desired values and ethics. 
 
19.	What are common office productivity inhibitors in organizations?   (p.553) 
•	Bureaucracy - administrative procedures that slow decision making and action taking 
•	Emails - too many emails sent out, employees spending too much time reading emails 
•	Meetings - unproductive meetings - too many people attending, no clear objective, no agenda, etc. 
•	Workspaces - open workspaces that prevent employees from concentrating, being productive 
 
20.	What are the consequences of limited upward communications?   (p.552) 
Upward communication channels encourage employees to speak openly to their superiors, namely to raise issues, identify improvement opportunities, make suggestions, propose solutions, etc. Unfortunately, many organizations do not adequately support upward communications, and fail to realize the many benefits that can be obtained from them.  (…) In such cases, employees are more likely to keep silent than to question initiatives or suggest new ideas at work. 
 
21.	How can senior executives facilitate upward communications?   (p.553) 
•	Build employee confidence by explaining the kind of feed-back sought. 
•	Solicit employee feed-back on a regular basis, in all types of forums. 
•	Meet employees at their place of work to make them more at ease. 
•	Avoid sending mixed messages that not all suggestions are valued. 
•	Demonstrate respect and accept that employees have different views. 
•	Communicate the actions taken or explain why no actions are taken. 
•	Reward managers and employees committed to upward communications. 
22.	What approaches can be used to address productivity issues caused by meetings?  (p.554) 
•	Declare meeting free days to help people accomplish their tasks. 
•	Schedule meetings at times that avoid mid-day interruptions. 
•	Clearly define meeting objective(s) and outline the agenda. 
•	Invite only the people who need to attend to achieve the meeting objective(s). 
•	Provide training to employees on how to chair meetings, and how to conduct themselves appropriately during meetings, to ensure that meetings are productive. 
•	Adopt meeting rules to ensure that all participants remain focused and engaged. 
•	Assign someone to take notes, including decisions made and actions to follow. 
•	Summarize the decisions, actions and next steps at the end of every meeting. 
 
23.	Explain why organizations have an obligation to maintain a civil workplace.   (p.555) 
Organizations have a moral and legal responsibility to maintain a civil workplace, and take action whenever they know (or ought to have known) that incivility is taking place. Not being aware that a workplace is harmful is not a valid defense when you are responsible for it. Ignoring or downplaying the problem is equally unacceptable. Employers can be sued by employees and held liable if they fail to address workplace incivility.  
 
24.	What are common employee health issues, and how can they be mitigated?   (p.556) 
•	Physical health issues - poor dietary habits, lack of sleep, addictions, burnout 
•	Mental health issues - sadness, hopelessness, anxiety, depression, stress 
•	Mitigation - Managers should be trained to identify situations where employees experience 
[health issues and] excessive stress, and take action to prevent health issues in general. 
 
25.	What are the main drivers of workplace stress and how big is the problem?   (p.556) 
•	Contributors - The main contributors or drivers of workplace stress are excessive workloads, competing demands, unrealistic deadlines, unclear expectations, difficult working relationships, lack of autonomy in managing workload, and limited support or collaboration from colleagues. 
•	Size of the problem - Surveys and studies indicate that more than forty percent of employees face 
high stress in their jobs, which affects their productivity, health and family stability. 
 
26.	Outline three examples of employee health initiatives.   (p.556) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Improved job design - manageable workloads, proper training, supervision and support 
•	Working hours policy - work-life balance, no emails outside working hours unless very urgent  
•	Management training - identify health issues affecting performance and how to engage employees 
•	Wellness programs - maintain a healthy lifestyle, health assessment, stress management, fitness 
•	Assistance programs - dealing with personal problems, sadness, anxiety, depression, etc. 
•	Flexible work arrangements - flextime and flexplace to deal with family obligations 
 
27.	What are examples of workplaces at a high risk of violence?   (p.557) 
Law enforcement, public transportation, hoteling, and retail stores such as gas stations, convenience stores, liquor stores, and jewelry stores. Examples of jobs with a high risk of violence include police officers, security guards, taxi drivers, prison guards, bartenders, mental health professionals, gas station attendants, and convenience store clerks.  Employees who handle money and/or deal directly with customers or the public are generally at a higher risk of workplace violence. 
 
28.	How can the risks of workplace violence be mitigated?   (p.557) 
•	Violence prevention programs adapted to workplace conditions 
•	Employee training in deescalating violent behaviors, and training in self-defense 
•	Deterrence mechanisms such as lights, alarms, security cameras and security guards 
•	Protection mechanisms such as locked doors and protected enclosures 
•	Immediate assistance mechanisms such as panic buttons with alarms 
•	Job design to ensure that employees in dangerous jobs work in teams 
29.	How can the risks of travelling to dangerous countries be mitigated?   (p.557) 
Employees who travel or work in dangerous locations need to be trained on how to reduce their exposure to violence. Common techniques include maintaining a low profile, not wearing expensive clothing, not driving expensive vehicles, varying work schedules, driving alternate routes, not advertising employee events, and not acting differently from the citizens of a host country. Other techniques include armed bodyguards, secure compounds, and armored vehicles for transportation. Employees can also be trained on how to behave in the event of a kidnap and ransom. 
 
30.	What is an effective approach for monitoring employee engagement?   (p.559) Employee attitude surveys are an effective tool for monitoring engagement levels. Many organizations conduct employee attitude surveys at least once annually. (…) A good approach is to communicate the survey results to employees, and develop an action plan for improving the results over time. It is important for employees to see that their feed-back is taken seriously, otherwise they may be reluctant to participate in additional or follow-up surveys. 
 
31.	What is the biggest differentiator that drives team performance?   (p.559) How significant is the effect of this differentiator on team performance? 
Research suggests that the biggest differentiator between high and low performing teams is trust in their leader. When team members trust their leader, they are eight times more likely to be fully engaged than those who do not trust their leader. By contrast, ineffective leadership is a significant source of risk because it can make employees disengaged. 
 
32.	Explain why managers and team leaders should be trained on managing teams, and why they should have the authority to make changes to teams that are underperforming.   (p.562-563) 
•	Need for training - Managers and team leaders are often promoted based on their functional expertise and accomplishments. They do not necessarily have formal training or practical experience on how to manage teams effectively. This lack of training and experience is a very common source of risk that can significantly affect employee engagement and team performance. 
•	Authority to make changes - Managers or team leaders should have the authority to make changes to team design in consultation with senior executives and human resource professionals. Not being able to alter team design for achieving organizational goals and objectives puts managers in a difficult position. It can lead to manager burnout and depression. 
 
33.	Explain constructive dialogue in the context of managing employee performance (p.567) Managers need to engage employees in a constructive dialogue when discussing performance. Effective techniques include emphasizing positive aspects before pointing out areas for improvement, and letting employees express their views openly. Managers should also minimize criticism by focusing on the most important two or three aspects that require improvement. Criticism should  be given in small doses and presented as improvement opportunities. There is nothing to gain by making employees defensive, frustrated, discouraged or angry. 
 
34.	Explain what is a key person risk and how it is mitigated.   (p.570) 
Key person risk exists when there is an overreliance on some individuals for critical organizational functions. It is mitigated with succession planning and related techniques for developing employees as temporary or permanent replacements (e.g. talent management, leadership development, etc.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Multiple Choice Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Human resource management is: 
a)	The process of finding and motivating qualified individuals to apply for organizational jobs and to accept job offers. 
b)	The process of determining organizational needs for human resources, and deciding how those needs will be met. 
c)	The processes, activities and methods for managing employees to achieve organizational goals. 
d)	The processes, activities and methods for developing employees, motivating them, and managing teams effectively. 
e)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.528 
2. Select the best definition of human resource management risks: 
a)	The inability to hire employee, develop their skills, offer attractive compensation, manage employee performance and make retention decisions. 
b)	The inability to meet regulatory obligations, resulting in a damaged reputation. 
c)	The inability to attract, develop and maintain a talented, engaged and productive employee workforce that meets organizational needs. 
d)	The inability to plan human resources, resulting in employee surpluses or shortages. 	c) 	p.528 
3. Human resource management is a source of reputation risk because: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Poor planning of human resources can lead to excessive workloads and burnout. 
b)	Too much turnover causes problems when there is a lot of work to do. 
c)	Dissatisfied employees may complain using informal channels such as social media. 
d)	Dissatisfied employees may quit their jobs and let their friends and relatives know. 
e)	Dissatisfied employees may lodge formal complaints with regulatory agencies. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 
e) 	p.528 
4. Human resource management is a source of compliance risk because: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	There are too many policies and procedures to follow when managing people. 
b)	Employees may not do what they are supposed to do, which is not in compliance with their roles, responsibilities and job descriptions. 
c)	Managers are often unaware of their human resource management responsibilities. 
d)	Human resource management is subject to detailed and complex employment laws and regulations regarding the treatment of employees. 
e)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.528 
5. The roles, responsibilities and accountabilities of human resource management functions include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Making human resource management decisions on behalf of managers. 
b)	Providing advice and support, but letting managers make decisions. 
c)	Accountability for all human resource management decisions. 
d)	Accountability for the advice and assistance provided to managers. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 
d) 	p.529 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
6. The following are attributes of strategic human resource management: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Customer service mindset. 
b)	Automation of routine processes. 
c)	Guidance and support for managers. 
d)	Monitoring of external trends and conditions. 
e)	Advice to senior executives on strategic issues. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	f) 	p.530 
7. Human resource planning is: 
a)	Developing a forecast of future needs based on input from managers. 
b)	Analyzing existing human resources to determine improvement opportunities. 
c)	Determining human resource needs and how those needs will be met. 
d)	Analyzing resource requirements based on internal and external variables. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.530 
8. The consequences of not adequately planning human resources are: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Vulnerabilities at executing strategies and meeting customer demand. 
b)	Loss of market share to competitors more adept at human resource planning. 
c)	Inability to develop a reliable forecast to determine human resource needs. 
d)	Inability to identify challenges associated with human resource management. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.531 
9. The two main challenges associated with human resource planning are: 
a)	Analyzing future needs, and reliable information on the current workforce. 
b)	Analyzing future needs, and implementing a human resource management system. 
c)	Analyzing employee trends, and reliable information on the current workforce. 
d)	Analyzing employee trends, and determining what to do about them. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.531 
10. The approach for developing a human resource plan is to: 
a)	Consider organizational strategies, and decide how many employees are needed. 
b)	Analyze employment trends, and develop strategies for implementing them. 
c)	Analyze and forecast future needs, compare needs with the existing workforce, identify differences, and develop strategies for ensuring that future needs are met. 
d)	Obtain input from managers on their needs and current workforce, and help them make decisions on how to develop their current workforce to meet future needs. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.533 
11. Human resource plans need to be updated on a regular basis because: 
a)	Some employees leave the organization, which causes unexpected job vacancies. 
b)	External environment conditions change and organizational strategies evolve. 
c)	Seasonal fluctuations in customer demand require hiring or laying off employees. 
d)	Getting a clear picture of the existing employee workforce is very challenging. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.533 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
12. Equal employment opportunity refers to: 
a)	The employee differences, ideas and behaviors that characterize a workplace. 
b)	Complaints of discrimination on the basis of race, religion, national origin, gender, age, physical or mental disability, marital status, and sexual orientation. 
c)	The obligation of employers to provide a fair chance of employment and promotion to people of designated groups (e.g. race, religion, gender, age, marital status, etc.). 
d)	Developing and applying hiring quotas for achieving diversity in the workplace. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.533 
13. Unintentional discrimination takes place when: 
a)	Managers are unaware that they discriminate against designated groups. 
b)	Errors are made in hiring decisions affecting designated groups. 
c)	Designated groups are specifically excluded in hiring decisions. 
d)	Job standards or hiring criteria may be perceived as discriminatory. 
e)	Workplace diversity does not reflect employment equity objectives. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.534 
14. The following actions help mitigate the risks of equal employment opportunity: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Maintain knowledge of equal employment opportunity laws. 
b)	Provide advice to managers regarding policies and compliance obligations. 
c)	Obtain legal advice when practicing intentional or unintentional discrimination. 
d)	Analyze the existing organizational workforce to determine if designated groups may be underrepresented, and develop a plan to address shortfalls. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.534 
15. Organizations without workplace diversity are at risk of:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Achieving results much lower than their diversified competitors. 
b)	Becoming insular and out of touch with their diverse customer base. 
c)	Having employees that fail to see things differently and challenge one another. 
d)	Making quicker decisions that are less informed. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.535-536 
16. Workplace diversity programs often fail because:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Coercive approaches are used to force managers to apply diversification. 
b)	Managers lack resources to implement workplace diversity objectives. 
c)	Change management approaches are ineffective and lack authority. 
d)	Employment equity objectives are unclear and cannot be implemented. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.536 
17. The consequences of making bad hiring decisions include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Poor individual performance, low productivity, poor customer service. 
b)	Low employee morale, lack of employee engagement, employee departures. 
c)	Inability to implement human resource management plans. 
d)	Poor job analysis, ineffective job advertising, ineffective initial screening. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.536-537 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
18. Job analysis provides the following benefits:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Provides the content for advertising jobs and evaluating candidates objectively. 
b)	Helps avoid complaints of bias and discrimination in hiring practices. 
c)	Helps develop an inventory of all the types of jobs in an organization. 
d)	Helps determine compensation levels, identify training and development needs, assess employee performance, and justify employee dismissals. 
e)	All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.537 
19. The main risks associated with recruitment are:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Overlooking sources that can generate qualified candidates. 
b)	Not generating enough candidates for consideration. 
c)	Selecting too many or too little candidates for interview. 
d)	Sending letters of offer to the wrong candidates. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.537 
20. The main risks applicable to job application forms include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Not asking for resumes to accompany the job application form. 
b)	Job application forms that are irrelevant for the jobs being posted. 
c)	Information and consents requested, which are not relevant to the job. 
d)	Questions that are contrary to equal employment opportunity guidelines. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.539 
21. Select the advantages and drawbacks associated with internal recruiting: 
a)	Advantages - Employee capabilities and performance are known or can be easily verified. Process is quicker, less expensive, and motivates existing employees. 
b)	Advantages - Employees are informed of job openings, they have the ability to apply if they want to, and therefore the can better accept whoever gets the job. 
c)	Drawbacks - Creates vacancies in other existing jobs. May also lead to a lack of workplace diversity (new ideas, fresh perspectives, etc.) 
d)	Drawbacks - Takes more time than external recruiting. Employees may not accept that a colleague gets promoted, or they may be jealous and want to leave. 	a) 
c) 	p.539 
22. The main risks associated with selection are to:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Not use recruiting sources that generate qualified applicants. 
b)	Send too many job offers and end up with too many employees 
c)	Send a job offer to the wrong applicant and they have to hire the person. 
d)	Overlook qualified applicants for the job to fill. 
e)	Select applicants who are not a good fit for the jobs to fill. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	d) 
e) 	p.539 
23. Hiring overqualified candidates is not necessarily a good decision because: 
a)	They expect and require a higher compensation. 
b)	They often end up dissatisfied and disengaged, and are more likely to leave. 
c)	They will want to renegotiate their job offer immediately after employment. 
d)	They may not accept the roles and responsibilities assigned to them. 
e)	They may complain on social media about their job offer. 
f)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.541 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
24. Select how the risk of negligent hiring can be described and mitigated. 
a)	Description - Employers may be sued for negligent hiring by employees who sense that they were taken advantaged of during interviews, and did not receive proper attention and job offers based on their answers to questions and qualifications. 
b)	Description - Employers may be sued for negligent hiring by employees and other stakeholders in cases of abuse, injury, theft of damaged property. Claimants argue that employers failed to exercise due care in selecting employees unfit for their jobs. 
c)	Mitigation - Conducting interviews with the presence of a human resource representative, conducting follow-up interviews, and asking candidates for references from past employers, and feed-back on their interview experience. 
d)	Mitigation - Conducting reference checks (past employers, experience, behaviors) and background checks (education, professional accreditations, criminal records). 	b) 
d) 	p.540-541 
25. The risk of implied employment contracts should be mitigated by: 
a)	Putting job offers and employment contracts in writing. 
b)	Making sure that candidates understand that they will be on probation. 
c)	Making job offers more explicit about for full-time or part-time employment. 
d)	Making sure that candidates and employees understand that employment is at-will, namely that it can be terminated at any time with proper advance notice. e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.542 
26. The following approaches help limit complaints related to employee testing: 
a)	Ensure that testing is relevant to job context. 
b)	Obtain legal advice to ensure that employment tests are defensible. 
c)	Obtain written consent from candidates when conducting interview. 
d)	Outline continued testing requirements as part of job offers. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.541 
27. Onboarding is: 
a)	The process of making sure that all employees are on-board with decisions. 
b)	An approach that helps new employees adopt an ethical conduct. 
c)	A method to make sure that employees accept their roles and responsibilities. 
d)	A process for integrating and acclimatizing new employees into an organization, and providing support for helping them become successful and productive. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.543 
28. The main risks of compensation and benefits are:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Challenges to attract, motivate and retain qualified employees. 
b)	Excessive costs, lower profitability and less competitiveness. 
c)	Unclear legal requirements applicable to compensation and benefits. 
d)	Job evaluations that are not up to date, affecting pay equity. 
e)	Low incentive compensation plans causing employee frustrations. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.543 







Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
29. Key external decision-making factors for compensation and benefits are: 
a)	Roles and responsibilities assigned, job descriptions, and job specifications. 
b)	Organizational strategies, relative job value and collective agreements. 
c)	Salary expectations, stakeholder perceptions, and social media disclosures. 
d)	Job evaluation, incentive compensation, and benefits administration practices. 
e)	Legal requirements, labor markets, competitor practices. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. h)		e) 	p.544 
30. Compensation and benefits need to be managed strategically because: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Attractive compensation and benefits are key for attraction and retention. 
b)	Compensation and benefits have to instill the right employee motivations. 
c)	Need to maintain the right balance for employee satisfaction and affordability. 
d)	Some employees will disclose their compensation on social media platforms. 
e)	It is not profitable to keep paying employees if they are not performing well. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 
b) 
c) 	p.544 
31. The benefits of job evaluations include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Ensures pay equity and prevents employee dissatisfaction. 
b)	Motivates employees to acquire additional competencies and skills. 
c)	Helps determine which employees are worthy of incentive compensation. 
d)	Prevents formal complaints and legal action related to unfair compensation. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
d) 	p.545 
32. The consequences of not using compensation ranges for job evaluations are that: 
a)	Employees may not be motivated to upgrade their qualifications over time. 
b)	Compensation levels may not meet pay equity guidelines. 
c)	Job evaluations may not reflect the value of jobs relative to others. 
d)	Managers have little ability to exercise discretion when making job offers. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
d) 	p.545 
33. The risks of incentive compensation include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Loss of motivation, excessive costs, and selfish behaviors. 
b)	Gaming the system, excessive risk taking, and free rider effects. 
c)	Stock options that do not materialize, bonuses that are not payable. 
d)	Negative perceptions that board members are not adequately rewarded. 
e)	Compensation incentives that do not take into account other benefits. 
f)	Jealousy among colleagues, leading to workplace incivility. g) All of the above. 
h) None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.546 
34. Incentive compensation is also called pay at risk because:   (select all that apply) 
a)	There are many risks associated with incentive compensation. 
b)	It is not clear if the incentive compensation risks can be mitigated. 
c)	The compensation results in higher income taxes for individuals. 
d)	Stakeholders may perceive the compensation negatively. 
e)	The payment is contingent upon the achievement of objectives. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	e) 	p.545 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
35. Effective approaches for mitigating incentive compensation risks include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Alignment of individual and group objectives to organizational objectives. 
b)	Independent audit of incentive compensation risks and mitigation strategies. 
c)	Keeping employees happy and motivated by setting targets easy to achieve. 
d)	Rewarding senior executives based on their risk-taking initiatives. e) None of the above. 
	f) 	All of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.546 
36. The risk of employee benefits include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Adding benefits indiscriminately over time, resulting in a patchwork of benefits that are costly and that many employees may not necessarily want. 
b)	Not having a benefits administration committee that manages benefits strategically. 
c)	Self-funding benefits when they should be insured instead. 
d)	Not getting feed-back from employees on the benefits that they truly value. 
e)	Offering a defined contribution plan instead of a defined benefit plan. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 	p.547-548 
37. The risk of defined benefit pension plans is: 
a)	Much lower for employers than defined contribution plans. 
b)	Much higher for employers than defined contribution plans. 
c)	Relatively the same as defined contribution plans. 
d)	No longer applicable due to government intervention. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.548 
38. The difference between training and development is: 
a)	Training is normally provided offsite, while development is usually onsite. 
b)	Development helps employees perform in their current job, while training prepares employees for future jobs, namely those involving new roles and responsibilities. 
c)	Training helps employees perform in their current job, while development prepares employees for future jobs, namely those involving new roles and responsibilities. 
d)	Development involves approaches such as coaching and mentoring, while training normally involves approaches such as courses, attending conferences, etc. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.548 
39. Less than ______ of companies believe that their learning programs are effective. a) Twenty percent 
b)	Forty percent 
c)	Sixty percent 
d)	Eighty percent 	b) 	p.548 
40. Training and development needs to be managed strategically because: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Organizations can spend millions of dollars annually with limited results. 
b)	New employee competencies and skills contribute to organizational renewal. 
c)	Lack of training and development leads to organizational decline and failure. 
d)	There is a positive correlation between employee learning and profitability. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.549-550 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
41. Deficient values and ethics are a significant source of risk because: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Improper employee behaviors, decisions and actions occur. 
b)	Some employees complain, disengage and leave the organization. 
c)	Suppliers and customers also complain and may refuse to do business. 
d)	It tarnishes organizational reputation and may lead to legal issues. 
e)	Employee misconduct can be as much as ten times higher. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	f) 	p.551-552 
42. Deficient values and ethics can be addressed by:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Drafting clear value statements, and ethical guidelines or codes of conduct. 
b)	Mandating that all employees attend training on values and ethics. 
c)	Making values and ethics expectations part of employee performance evaluations. 
d)	Recognizing and promoting individuals who are role models for others to follow. 
e)	Monitoring behaviors, and encouraging employees to report breaches of conduct. 
f)	Taking disciplinary action against individuals acting contrary to expectations. g) All of the above. 
h) None of the above. 	g) 	p.552 
43. Upward communications needs to be encouraged because: 
a)	Employees will not seek directions if they are left on their own. 
b)	Managers cannot manage employees who refuse to talk to them. 
c)	Employees are otherwise more likely to keep silent than make suggestions. 
d)	It is the only way to ensure that work gets done on a timely basis. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 
 	p.552 
44. Senior executives facilitate upward communication by:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Keeping an open door policy for employees to bring issues to their attention. 
b)	Making employees able to report issues anonymously in a suggestion box. 
c)	Meeting employees at their place of work to make them more at ease. 
d)	Communication actions taken or reasons for no actions when suggestions are made. 
e)	Assigning someone to receive whistleblower complaints regarding misconduct. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.553 
45. Common office productivity inhibitors are:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Employees napping and snoring in their cubicles or offices. 
b)	Bureaucracy, emails, meetings, workspaces. 
c)	Water cooler breaks, coffee breaks and lunch breaks. 
d)	Networking with office colleagues and not getting work done. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.553-554 
46. Workplace incivility is: 
a)	A heated argument that may lead to verbal abuse or physical aggression. 
b)	An action or omission that may be perceived as discriminatory. 
c)	Not asking for permission before doing something that can affect others. 
d)	Disrespectful, inappropriate, abusive or threatening behavior. 
e)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.554 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
47. Approximately _______ of employees report that their performance has declined  as a result of workplace incivility incidents directed at them. a) Ten percent. 
b)	One third. 
c)	Two thirds. 
d)	Ninety percent. 	c) 	p.555 
48. Workplace incivility is a growing problem. More than _______ of employees report being mistreated by colleagues at least once a month. a) Twenty percent 
b)	Forty percent 
c)	Sixty percent 
d)	Eighty percent 	c) 	p.555 
49. Techniques for managing workplace incivility include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Management policies, group norms, awareness training. 
b)	Monitoring process, complaints processes, resolution mechanisms. 
c)	Written apologies, disciplinary actions, exit interviews. 
d)	Reprimands, leave without pay, demotions, terminations. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.555 
50. The principle of natural justice is:  (select all that apply) 
a)	A fair and timely hearing, a formal proceeding, the right to have a lawyer present, and fair compensation for losses or damages related to workplace violence. 
b)	A principle enshrined in a law that can override the constitution. 
c)	A fair and timely hearing, a bias-free proceeding, the ability to present arguments, and a timely decision and resolution of a complaint. 
d)	A fair and timely compensation for harms related to harassment or bullying. 
e)	A principle that overrides human resource management policies and procedures. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 
e) 	p.555 
51. Common mental health issues in the workplace include: 
a)	Sadness, hopelessness, anxiety and depression. 
b)	Illnesses caused by poor dietary habits, insomnia and addictions. 
c)	Bipolar personalities, obsessive compulsive disorders and schizophrenia. 
d)	Post traumatic stress disorders and psychopathic disorders. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.556 
52. Surveys indicate that more than ________ of employees face high stress in their job. a) Ten percent. 
b)	Twenty percent. 
c)	Forty percent 
d)	Sixty percent. 
e)	Eighty percent. 	c) 	p.556 
53. Examples of employee health initiatives include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Improved job design, working hours policy, management training. 
b)	Wellness programs, assistance programs, flexible work arrangements. 
c)	Swimming, jogging, weightlifting, dieting, saunas, whirlpools. 
d)	Employee benefits such as vacations, sick leave, family days, etc. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.556 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
54. Workplace violence includes:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Arguments, condescending attitudes, stubbornness, and contrarian views. 
b)	Selfishness, bad manners, advances of a sexual nature and harassment. 
c)	Intimidation, verbal threats, yelling, throwing objects, pushing and stalking. 
d)	Armed robberies, shootings, assault and battery, sexual assaults. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.557 
55. Techniques for mitigating the risks of workplace violence include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Violence prevention programs adapted to workplace conditions. 
b)	Employee training in deescalating violent behaviors, and training in self-defense. 
c)	Deterrence mechanisms such as lights, alarms, security cameras and security guards. 
d)	Protection mechanisms such as locked doors and protected enclosures. 
e)	Immediate assistance mechanisms such as panic buttons with alarms. 
f)	Job design to ensure that employees in dangerous jobs work in teams. g) All of the above. 
h) None of the above. 	g) 	p.557 
56. When travelling or working in dangerous countries, it is advisable to: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Maintain a low profile (not wear expensive clothes, or drive expensive vehicles). 
b)	Vary work schedules, drive alternate routes and not advertise employee events. 
c)	Not act differently from the citizens of the host country and try to blend in. 
d)	Train employees on how to behave in the event of a kidnap and ransom demand. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.557 
57. Employee engagement is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	The hiring of employees through recruitment and selection. 
b)	Getting employees to carry out the tasks that they have been hired to do. 
c)	The extent that employees are motivated, satisfied and committed. 
d)	An approach for getting the most out of employees in difficult times. 
e)	A survey that is conducted to determine if employees are motivated. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	c) 	p.557 
58. Actively disengaged employees are:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Very few and typically those who have personal problems to deal with. 
b)	More likely to act in ways detrimental to their organization. 
c)	Usually employees who are part of labor unions or that do clerical work. 
d)	More likely to have a negative influence on their colleagues. 
e)	Less than five percent of total employees in large organizations. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	b) 
d) 	p.558 
59. Factors that create employee engagement include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Effective recruitment and selection, onboarding, and incentive compensation. 
b)	Improved job design, flexible hours, wellness programs and assistance programs. 
c)	Sense of purpose, meaningful work, proper management, training and development. 
d)	Team leadership and cohesiveness, trust in leadership, flexible work arrangements. 
e)	Performance appraisals, training, discipline, sanctions and terminations. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.558-559 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
60. An effective approach for monitoring employee engagement is:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Employee attitude surveys conducted at least annually. 
b)	Tracking absenteeism, workplace incivility, and workplace violence. 
c)	Customers surveys that measure the quality of customer service. 
d)	Tracking physical health and mental health issues through wellness programs. 
e)	Measure productivity to determine if it is improving or deteriorating. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 	p.559 
61. The following issues cause leadership training and development programs to be ineffective:  (select all that apply) 
a)	There is limited consensus regarding what makes a good leader. 
b)	Leadership programs cover a broad range of issues not adapted to individual needs. 
c)	Many managers have difficulty moving from theory to practice. 
d)	Some managers are set in their ways and unwilling to change. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.559 
62. The biggest differentiator between high and low performing teams is: 
a)	Clarity of goals and objectives. 
b)	Sense of purpose and direction. 
c)	Trust in the leader. 
d)	Resources and empowerment. 
e)	Incentive compensation. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.559 
63. Attributes that make effective leaders include: 
a)	Confidence, modesty, listening, delegation, support. 
b)	Clear agenda, broad perspective, results orientation. 
c)	Decisiveness, quick decisions, extensive delegation. 
d)	Meeting management, time management, supervision. 
e)	Cleverness, assertiveness, persuasiveness, forcefulness. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.560 
64. Common issues affecting team performance include:   (select all that apply) a) Lack of alignment to specific goals, and unclear roles and responsibilities. 
b)	Power struggles, personality differences, conflicts of interest. 
c)	Ineffective team leadership or team design. 
d)	Teams that are too big or too small to function properly. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.561 
65. Some teams are dysfunctional even though they seem to operate effectively. 
Common examples of risks that negatively affect the performance of such teams are: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Excessive risk, and cascading and compounding effects,  
b)	Silent views, hidden knowledge, and amplifying errors. 
c)	Personality differences, power struggles, interpersonal conflicts. 
d)	Cascading answers, risky shift, and lost causes. 
e)	Stress, insecurity, anxiety, depression, and burnout. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	b) 
d) 	p.561 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
66. Techniques for managing teams effectively include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Define the purpose, establish smart objectives, assign roles and responsibilities 
b)	Analyze team design, provide training, and secure adequate resources 
c)	Manage meetings, encourage open debate, explore alternative options 
d)	Integrate with other groups, measure team performance, reward team success. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.563 
67. The two significant sources of risk affecting employee performance management are: 
(select two out of the following) 
a)	Ineffective processes for managing employee performance. 
b)	Employees quiet quitting, unwilling to improve their performance. 
c)	Managers not properly trained for managing employee performance. 
d)	Managers not wanting to conduct performance evaluations objectively. 
e)	Legal issues associated with unclear performance expectations. 
f)	Performance appraisals conducted only once a year. 	a) 
c) 	p.563 
68. The key to employee performance management is to: 
a)	Make sure that employees understand their job description. 
b)	Clearly define expectations and performance objectives up front. 
c)	Warn employees that poor performance will be sanctioned. 
d)	Ask employees to self-assess their performance objectively. 
e)	Train managers on how to deal with poor performers. 
f)	Accept that some employees are underqualified for their jobs. 	b) 	p.564 
69. Training on employee performance management is important because: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Job descriptions are not always clear or up-to-date. 
b)	Employees require feed-back on a continuous basis, not just once a year. 
c)	Performance management processes are an administrative burden. 
d)	Managers often lack of the skills to appropriately manage employee performance. 
e)	Some employees do not react very well to feed-back, even when it is constructive. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	d) 
e) 	p.566 
70. In the context of employee performance management, discipline is: 
a)	Training employees on what to do and exercise self-restraint. 
b)	Getting employees to obey rules using mechanistic management methods. 
c)	Arriving to work on time and being well prepared for meetings. 
d)	Taking actions to address unacceptable behaviors and performance issues. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.567 
71. Common behavioral issues that require discipline include: 
a)	Faulty attendance, misconduct and dishonesty. 
b)	Not practicing active listening and speaking too loud or too often. 
c)	Smoking inside buildings, and coming to work intoxicated. 
d)	Bad manners, foul language, bad breath, dirty clothes. 
e)	Arriving late for work and leaving too early in the afternoon. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 	p.567 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
72. Positive discipline is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	A method of providing constructive feed-back positively to employees. 
b)	A process of applying disciplinary measures gradually until performance issues  are resolved (e.g. verbal warning, written warning, leave of absence, dismissal). 
c)	A method for positively engaging employees to define their performance objectives and accept responsibility for achieving those objectives on a timely basis. 
d)	An approach that rests on the premise that an employee should acknowledge that a performance issue exists, and accept responsibility for resolving the issue. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.569 
73. Dismissal is: 
a)	The termination of employees with a severance package and counselling to help  find another job. It is typically done as part of lay-offs due to shortages of work. 
b)	The termination of employees with or without just cause, after giving them an opportunity to resign as a result of persistent performance issues. 
c)	The termination of employees for just cause, such as completely unacceptable behavior, or significant performance issues that persist despite disciplinary actions. 
d)	The termination of employees who have done an illegal or reprehensible act. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.569 
74. From a legal standpoint, the onus of proof for just cause rests with: a) The employer. 
b)	The manager or supervisor of the employee. 
c)	The human resource management professional. 
d)	The employee. 
e)	The labor union if there is one. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.569 
75. Managers should never dismiss an employee without getting advice from human resource professionals regarding documentation requirements because: a) The onus of proof for just cause rests on the employer. 
b)	Employees may legally challenge their dismissal as a wrongful dismissal. 
c)	Employees who win court cases for wrongful dismissal may have to be reinstated with retroactive pay, or may otherwise be awarded damages set by the court. d) All of the above. 
e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.569 
76. Employees may obtain damages for constructive dismissal if: 
a)	Their dismissal was not done in a fair and equitable manner. 
b)	Their job conditions were changed without their consent. 
c)	They were not offered to resign in lieu of getting fired. 
d)	They did not receive their severance payment entitlements. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.570 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
77. In the context of human resource management, succession planning is: 
a)	Plans to hire a new chief executive officer to replace an existing one. 
b)	Planning for the management of an estate in the event that someone dies. 
c)	The identification and development of employees who can replace others,  in the event that those other employees are no longer available. 
d)	An approach for implementing a talent or leadership management program. 
e)	The development of a chart to determine people replacement options. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	c) 	p.570 
78. The main purpose of succession planning is to: 
a)	Help determine who should get promoted and when. 
b)	Identify which employees are about to retire and plan their departure. 
c)	Develop a recruitment plan to address anticipated staff shortages. 
d)	Ensure business continuity by mitigating key person risk. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.570 
79. Key person risk is: 
a)	The possibility that someone may become indispensable using deceitful tactics. 
b)	The uncertainties associated with potential departures of senior executives. 
c)	An overreliance on some individuals critical to organizational functions. 
d)	The risk that important stakeholders may criticize what the organization is doing. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.570 
80. Techniques for developing employees in the context of succession planning include: a) Talent and leadership management. 
b)	Cross training and job rotation. 
c)	Incentive compensation for accepting new responsibilities. 
d)	Disciplinary actions aimed at improving employee performance. 
e)	Replacement charts that indicate who is ready for a promotion. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.571 
 
 
True or False Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Human resource management is the processes, activities and methods for managing employees to achieve organizational goals. 	True 	p.528 
2. Human resource management is the process of finding and motivating qualified individuals to apply for organizational jobs and to accept job offers. 	False 	p.528 
3. Human resource management risks are the inability to attract, develop and maintain a talented, engaged and productive employee workforce that meets organizational needs. 	True 	p.528 
4. Human resource management risks are best defined as the inability to recruit and offer attractive compensation, resulting in employee departures and turnover. 	False 	p.528 
5. Human resource management is a major source of reputation risk 	True 	p.528 
6. Human resource management is not a source of compliance risk. 	False 	p.528 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
7. Human resource management functions provide advice and support to managers,  but managers remain responsible for making human resource management decisions. 	True 	p.529 
8. Human resource management functions are responsible for the decisions made by managers when they apply human resource management policies and procedures. 	False 	p.529 
9. Attributes of strategically-focused human resource management functions include a customer service mindset, and the automation of routine processes. 	True 	p.529 
10. Attributes of strategically-focused human resource management functions include developing policies and procedures that are in compliance with laws and regulations. 	False 	p.529 
11. Human resource planning is determining human resource needs, and deciding how those needs will be met. 	True 	p.530 
12. The consequences of not adequately planning human resources are vulnerabilities at executing strategies and meeting customer demand, resulting in a loss of market share, lower revenues, lower profitability and dissatisfied customers and stakeholders. 	True 	p.531 
13. The consequences of not adequately planning human resources are inaccurate information on the current workforce, and inability to develop a reliable forecast. 	False 	p.531 
14. The two main challenges associated with human resource planning are complexities in analyzing future needs, and having reliable information on the current workforce. 	True 	p.531 
15. The two main challenges associated with human resource planning are analyzing current and future employment trends, and deciding what to do about them. 	False 	p.531 
16. The approach for developing a human resource plan is to analyze and forecast future needs, compare the needs with the existing workforce, identify gaps and differences, and develop strategies for ensuring that the future needs will be met. 	True 	p.533 
17. Human resource plans need to be updated on a regular basis because external environment conditions change and organizational strategies evolve. 	True 	p.533 
18. Human resource plans need to be updated on a regular basis because seasonal fluctuations in customer demand require hiring or laying off employees. 	False 	 p.533 
19. Equal employment opportunity refers to the obligation of employers to provide a fair chance of employment and promotion to people of designated groups. 	True 	p.533 
20. Equal employment opportunity refers to the assortment of employee differences, perceptions, ideas and behaviors that characterize a workplace. 	False 	p.533 
21. Unintentional discrimination takes place when job standards or hiring criteria may be perceived as discriminatory by members of designated groups. 	True 	p.534 
22. Unintentional discrimination occurs when the actual workplace diversity does not reflect the employment equity objectives of an organization. 	False 	p.534 
23. Actions to help mitigate the risks of equal employment opportunity include maintaining knowledge of employment equity laws, providing advice to managers regarding those obligations, and obtaining legal advice on hiring practices. 	True 	p.534 
24. Actions to help mitigate the risks of equal employment opportunity include not filling vacant positions unless employment equity objectives can be achieved by doing so. 	False 	p.534 
25. Organizations without workplace diversity are at risk of becoming insular, out of touch with their customer base, and achieving lower results than diversified competitors. 	True 	p.535-536 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
26. Organizations without workplace diversity are at risk of employment equity lawsuits. 	False 	p.535-536 
27. Workplace diversity has a broader objective than equal employment opportunity. 	True 	p.535-536 
28. Workplace diversity if the main objective of equal employment opportunity. 	False 	p.535-536 
29. Recruitment is the process of finding and motivating qualified individuals to apply for organizational jobs and accept offers.  Selection is the process of determining which individuals best meets job requirements and should receive an offer. 	True 	p.536 
30. Recruitment is the process of determining which individuals best meets job requirements and should receive an offer. Selection is the process of finding and motivating qualified individuals to apply for organizational jobs and accept offers.   	False 	p.536 
31. The consequences of bad hiring decisions include poor individual performance, low productivity, lack of employee engagement and a higher rate of departures. 	True 	p.536-537 
32. The consequences of bad hiring decisions include poor job analysis, ineffective job advertising, ineffective initial screening, and mismanaged follow-up interviews. 	False 	p.536-537 
33. Job analysis helps mitigate many risks associated with human resource management. 	True 	p.537 
34. Job analysis only provides benefits related to recruitment and selection. 	False 	p.537 
35. Job analysis helps determine compensation levels, identify training and development needs, assess employee performance, and justify employee dismissals. 	True 	p.537 
36. The outputs of job analysis are a job description (roles and responsibilities of the job) and a job specification (qualifications required for the job). 	True 	p.537 
37. The main risks associated with recruitment are overlooking sources that can generate qualified candidates and not generating enough candidates for consideration. 	True 	p.537 
38. The main risks applicable to job application forms include forms not relevant to the jobs posted, and not obtaining a complete resume to accompany the form. 	False 	p.539 
39. The main risks associated with selection are to overlook qualified applicants for the job to fill, and select applicants who are not a good fit for the jobs to fill. 	True 	p.539 
40. The main risks associated with selection are to send job offers to the wrong applicants, or send out too many job offers that are all accepted, resulting in too many employees. 	False 	p.539 
41. The risk of negligent hiring can be mitigated by conducting reference checks  
(past experience, behaviors) and background checks (accreditations, criminal records). 	True 	p.540-541 
42. The risk of negligent hiring can be mitigated by conducting interviews in the presence of a human resource representative, conducting follow-up interviews. 	False 	p.540-541 
43. Hiring overqualified candidates is not necessarily a good decision. 	True 	p.541 
44. The risk of implied employment contracts is mitigated by putting job offers in writing. 	False 	p.542 
45. Complaints related to employee testing can be limited by ensuring that the tests are relevant to job context, obtaining written consent from candidates during interviews, and outlining continued testing requirements in job offers. 	True 	p.541 
46. Onboarding is a process for integrating and acclimatizing new employees into an organization, and providing support for making them productive and successful. 	True 	p.543 
47. Onboarding is a process of making sure that all employees are on-board with decisions. 	False 	p.543 
48. More than thirty percent of new employees quit their job within the first 6 or 7 months. 	True 	p.543 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
49. Effective onboarding mitigates the risk of new employee departures. 	True 	p.543 
50. The main risks of compensation and benefits are: 
-  Challenges to attract, motivate and retain qualified employees on one hand -  Excessive costs, lower profitability and less competitiveness on the other. 	True 	p.543 
51. The main risks of compensation and benefits are: 
-	Paying too much or too little relative to the value of each job. 
-	Offering incentive compensation that is too generous for the results achieved. 	False 	p.543 
52. Key internal decision-making factors applicable to compensation and benefits include organizational strategies, job value, employee satisfaction, and collective agreements. 	True 	p.544 
53. Key internal decision-making factors applicable to compensation and benefits include  legal requirements, labor markets, and competitor prices. 	False 	p.544 
54. Compensation and benefits need to be managed strategically to avoid risks. 	True 	p.544 
55. Job evaluations help mitigate the risks of pay equity, employee dissatisfaction, formal complaints, and legal action related to discriminatory or unfair compensation. 	True 	p.545 
56. Job evaluations help mitigate the risks of employment equity and workplace diversity. 	False 	p.545 
57. The use of compensation ranges related to job evaluations provides managers with the ability reward employees who upgrade their competencies and skills. 	True 	p.545 
58. The use of compensation ranges related to job evaluations helps ensure that employment equity, workplace diversity, and pay equity objectives are met. 	False 	p.545 
59. The risks of incentive compensation include loss of employee motivation, excessive costs, selfish behaviors, gaming the system, excessive risk taking, and free rider effects. 	True 	p.546 
60. The risks of incentive compensation include stock options that do not materialize, board members not adequately rewarded, and jealousy among workplace colleagues. 	False 	p.546 
61. Incentive compensation is also called pay at risk because the payment of incentive compensation is contingent upon the achievement of objectives. 	True 	p.546 
62. Incentive compensation is also called pay at risk because the organization is putting itself at risk of paying the compensation if objectives are achieved. 	False 	p.546 
63. Effective approaches for mitigating incentive compensation risks include: 
-	Alignment of individual and group objectives to organizational objectives. 
-	Independent audit of incentive compensation risks and mitigation strategies. 	True 	p.546 
64. Effective approaches for mitigating incentive compensation risks include: 
-	Keeping employees happy and motivated by setting targets that are easily achievable. 
-	Rewarding senior executives in accordance with their risk-taking initiatives. 	False 	p.546 
65. The risk of employee benefits include adding benefits indiscriminately over time, resulting in a patchwork of costly benefits that are not necessarily valued by employees. 	True 	p.547-548 
66. The risk of employee benefits can be mitigated by consulting employees, tailoring benefits to varying needs, establishing a benefits management committee, determining whether benefits should be self-funded or insured, and applying user fees to claims. 	True 	p.547-548 
67. The risk of employee benefits can be mitigated by offering more compensation instead of benefits, reducing benefits coverage, and shifting employees to defined benefit plans. 	False 	p.547-548 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
68. Training helps employees perform in their current job, while development prepares employees for future jobs, namely those involving new roles and responsibilities. 	True 	p.548 
69. Development helps employees perform in their current job, while training prepares employees for future jobs, namely those involving new roles and responsibilities. 	False 	p.548 
70. Less than forty percent of companies believe that their learning programs are effective. 	True 	p.548 
71. Only eighty percent of companies believe that their learning programs are effective. 	False 	p.548 
72. Training and development needs to be managed strategically. 	True 	p.548 
73. Lack of employee training and development leads to organizational decline. 	True 	p.548 
74. Working environments are plagued with issues that negatively impact employee wellbeing, motivation, productivity and performance. These issues are significant sources of risk that negatively affect organizational performance and results. 	True 	p.551 
75. Deficient values and ethics are not a significant source of risk provided that there is effective management supervision of employee behaviors. 	False 	p.551-552 
76. Companies with weak values and ethics may experience levels of employee misconduct as much as ten times higher than companies with strong values and ethics. 	True 	p.551 
77. Deficient values and ethics do not require strong leadership and forceful actions from chief executive officers as long as there is good communication and employee training. 	False 	p.552 
78. Common office productivity inhibitors include bureaucracy, emails, meetings and workspaces not adapted to the kind of work that employees have to do. 	True 	p.553-554 
79. Common office productivity inhibitors include water cooler breaks, coffee breaks, lunch breaks, employees napping, and employees not paying attention to instructions. 	False 	p.553-554 
80. More than seventy percent of senior executives complain that too many meetings are unproductive and inefficient at their organization. 	True 	p.554 
81. Upward communication channels need to be encouraged to help employees speak openly, namely to raise issues, make suggestions, propose solutions, etc. 	True 	p.552 
82. Upward communication channels need to be encouraged to help managers understand how work is getting done, what activities are carried out, and why it is taking so long. 	False 	p.552 
83. Senior executives can facilitate upward communications by communicating expectations, keeping an open door policy, and requesting solutions if issues are raised. 	False 	p.553 
84. Workplace incivility is disrespectful, inappropriate, abusive or threatening behavior that includes but is not limited to harassment and bullying. 	True 	p.554 
85. Workplace incivility means not respecting civil liberties in the workplace. 	False 	p.554 
86. Approximately two thirds of employees report that their performance has declined as a result of workplace incivility incidents directed at them. 	True 	p.555 
87. Techniques for managing workplace incivility include policies, awareness training, complaints processes, resolution mechanism, and disciplinary actions. 	True 	p.555 
88. Techniques for managing workplace incivility include disciplinary actions such written apologies, reprimands, leave without pay, demotions and terminations. 	True 	p.555 
89. The principle of natural justice is the entitlement to a fair and timely hearing, a bias-free proceeding, the ability to present arguments, and a timely decision and resolution. 	True 	p.555 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
90. The principle of natural justice is a fair and just compensation for crimes related to discrimination, harassment, bullying or workplace violence. 	False 	p.555 
91. Common mental health issues in the workplace include sadness, hopelessness, anxiety and depression. Workplace stress is often the cause of workplace health issues. 	True 	p.556 
92. Surveys indicate that more than forty percent of employees face high stress at work. 	True 	p.556 
93. Examples of employee health initiatives include improved job design, working hours policy, wellness programs, assistance programs, and flexible work arrangements. 	True 	p.556 
94. Examples of employee health initiatives in the workplace include physical fitness tests, swimming lessons, jogging after work, dieting, saunas, and whirlpools. 	False 	p.556 
95. Workplace violence includes intimidation, threats, yelling, throwing objects, pushing, assault and battery, stalking, sexual assaults, armed robberies, and shootings. 	True 	p.557 
96. Employees who handle money and/or deal directly with customers or the public are generally at a higher risk of workplace violence. 	True 	p.557 
97. Techniques for mitigating workplace violence include prevention programs, training in de-escalation of violent behaviors, training in self-defense, deterrence mechanisms such as security cameras, and immediate assistance mechanisms such as panic buttons. 	True 	p.557 
98. Employee engagement is the extent that employees are motivated, satisfied and committed to their work and organization. 	True 	p.557 
99. Employee engagement is a survey conducted to determine if employees are motivated. 	False 	p.557 
100. Research indicates that less than twenty percent of employees worldwide feel a sense of purpose in their work, and that only sixteen percent of employees are fully engaged. 	True 	p.558 
101. Only one third of American workers are highly engaged or engaged at work. 	True 	p.558 
102. Actively disengaged employees are more likely to act in ways detrimental to their organization, and are more likely to have a negative influence on their colleagues. 	True 	p.558 
103. Actively disengaged employees are unlikely to act in ways detrimental to their organization other than not being productive in their work. 	False 	p.558 
104. Annual employee attitude surveys are an effective and popular approach for monitoring employee engagement in large organizations. 	True 	p.559 
105. Less than fifty percent of chief executives are confident that training and development programs will result in better leadership. 	True 	p.559 
106. The fact that there is limited consensus regarding what makes a good leaders is one of the factors that make leadership training and development programs ineffective. 	True 	p.559 
107. Most employees agree that their leaders have a clear sense of direction. 	False 	p.559 
108. Teams that trust their leader are eight times more likely to be fully engaged. 	True 	p.559 
109. Attributes that make effective leaders include assertiveness and decisiveness. 	False 	p.560 
110. Common issues affecting team performance include lack of alignment to specific goals, unclear roles and responsibilities, power struggles, and personality differences. 	True 	p.561 
111. Common issues affecting team performance include self-managed teams, virtual teams, excessively large teams, and teams that are too small to meet objectives. 	False 	p.561 
112. Some teams are dysfunctional even though they seem to operate effectively. 	True 	p.561 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
113. Research suggests that 10 to 15 people is the optimal size for team effectiveness. 	False 	p.562 
114. Techniques for managing teams effectively include defining the purpose, establishing smart objectives, assigning roles and responsibilities, and providing training. 	True 	p.563 
115. Techniques for managing teams effectively include remote work connections, communication of directions, ongoing supervision, and sanctions for work not completed. 	False 	p.563 
116. Two significant sources of risk affecting employee performance management are ineffective processes, and lack of managerial training in managing performance. 	True 	p.563 
117. Only thirty percent of employees believe that the performance management process of their organization helps improve employee performance. 	True 	p.564 
118. Only about one quarter of employees strongly agree that their manager provides meaningful feed-back that helps improve job performance. 	True 	p.563 
119. Most employees believe that the performance management process of their organization helps improve employee performance. 	False 	p.564 
120. The key to employee performance management is to clearly define expectations and performance objectives up front. 	True 	p.564 
121. Collect detailed and objective information on employee weaknesses, shortcomings and improvement opportunities to avoid arguments during performance appraisals. 	False 	p.564 
122. Training on employee performance management is important because: 
-	managers often lack the skills to adequately manage employee performance. 
-	many employees do not react very well to feed-back, even when it is constructive. 	True 	p.566 
123. Training on employee performance management is important because the process for setting performance objectives and conducting evaluations is an administrative burden. 	False 	p.566 
124. In the context of employee performance management, discipline is taking actions to address unacceptable behaviors and performance issues. 	True 	p.567 
125. In the context of employee performance management, discipline is getting employees to acknowledge rules and codes of conduct, and to abide by them at all times. 	False 	p.567 
126. Common issues that require discipline include faulty attendance, unsatisfactory performance, misconduct and dishonesty. 	True 	p.567 
127. Positive discipline rests on the premise that an employee should acknowledge that a performance problem or issue exists, and accept responsibility for resolving it. 	True 	p.569 
128. Progressive discipline involves taking disciplinary actions gradually, as needed until an employee performance issue is either resolved or the employee is terminated. 	True 	p.569 
129. Dismissal is employee termination for just cause, such as completely unacceptable behavior, or significant performance issues that persist despite disciplinary actions. 	True 	p.569 
130. Dismissal is an employee termination that includes a severance package, and sometimes counselling for helping the employee cope with job termination. 	False 	p.569 
131. The onus of proof for just cause in a dismissal rests with the employer. 	True 	p.569 
132. Employees who win court cases for wrongful dismissal may have to be reinstated and given retroactive pay, or may otherwise be awarded damages set by the court. 	True 	p.569 
133. Constructive dismissal may have occurred if job conditions were changed without the consent of an employee, in which case the employee may be entitled damages. 	True 	p.570 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
134. Succession planning is the identification and development of employees who can replace others, in the event that those other employees are no longer available. 	True 	p.570 
135. Succession planning is the implementation of a talent management program. 	False 	p.570 
136. The main purpose of succession planning is to ensure business continuity by mitigating key person risk. 	True 	p.570 
137. Key person risk is an overreliance on individuals critical to organizational functions. 	True 	p.570 
138. Key person risk is the possibility that an employee may become indispensable. 	False 	p.570 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 12  
Financial Management and Accounting Risks 
 
 
Review Questions 
 
1. Financial management 
 
a)	What is financial management?   (p.586) 
Financial management is the processes, activities and methods for managing financial resources to achieve organizational goals. It involves analyzing the external and internal financial context, developing plans and budgets, allocating financial resources, controlling financial operations, processing transactions, and monitoring financial results. 
 
b)	What are the main components of financial management and accounting risks?   (p.586) 
External Financial Risks		Internal Financial Risk
Market Risks	Financial Situation Risks Financial Process Risks
-	Interest rates	- Cash flow	- Budgeting
-	Exchange rates	- Working capital	- Accounting  	Accounting Risks
-	Commodity prices	- Profitability	- Controlling	- Processing
-	Liquidity	- Asset turnover	- Cost management	- Costing
-	Economic cycles	- Cost structure	- Forecasting	- Valuation
Credit Risks	- Capital structure	- Reallocation	- Reporting
Financing Risks
 
c)	Explain the dual roles of financial management functions.   (p.587) 
•	Enablers - provide information, advice and support to guide financial policies, investments and financing decisions; and enable the processing and reporting of financial transactions. 
•	Controllers - exercise oversight to ensure that financial policies and procedures are applied as intended; and ensure that control systems are in place to meet control objectives such as the effectiveness and efficiency of operations, the safeguarding of assets, compliance with policies, laws and regulations, and reliable, relevant and timely reporting. 
 
d)	Describe three responsibilities of financial management functions.   (p.588-589) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Accounting and control - design systems that meet organizational objectives 
•	Financial reporting - reliable, relevant and timely reports to internal and external stakeholder. 
•	Planning, budgeting, forecasting - provide assistance for managers to translate their plans and priorities into budgets. Develop systems for managers to forecast financial results. 
•	Financial analysis - financial results analysis, insights for managing costs and improving financial situation, develop or provide assistance for the development of business cases. 
•	Financial risk management - leadership and ownership of financial and accounting risks. 
•	Treasury operations - strategies, systems and processes for managing cash and working capital; advice on market risks, credit risks and financing risks; advice on capital structure; advice on financing requirements, terms and conditions; solution to reduce cost of capital. 
•	Audit committee and external audit support - support audit committee oversight; provide information and explanations to external auditors of financial statements. 
•	Stakeholder communications - communicate financial information to internal and external 
stakeholders; explain the information and controls in place for financial reporting. 
 
2. Market risks 
 
a)	What are market risks?   (p.589) 
Market risks can be defined as the external conditions that create trade and borrowing uncertainties. All organizations that borrow money, buy or sell internationally, and buy or sell investment securities or commodities have market risks. Fluctuations in interest rates, currency exchange, investment securities values, and commodity prices are sources of uncertainties that can positively or negatively affect organizational performance and results.  
 
b)	Briefly describe the five basic steps for managing market risks.   (p.589) 
•	Analyze the exposure - Determine the net amount of exposure for each market risk based on budgets and forecasts. Estimate the net effects of variations in rates or prices using a model. 
•	Decide on a policy - Adopt a consistent approach to accept or transfer market risks in whole or in part. There is no definitive approach. Consider the size of exposures, the expected volatility, the potential effects of variations, and the effectiveness and costs of mitigation. 
•	Select the right techniques - retain and fund uncertainties, or transfer using derivatives. 
•	Control the execution - No single person should be able to complete a trade in securities (including derivatives).  Need two signatures or a separate supervisor confirmation. 
•	Monitor the results - monitor changing conditions, make adjustments to derivative positions, 
monitor the accuracy of forecasts and models, analyze the effectiveness of the solutions. 
 
3. Economic cycles 
 
a)	What are economic cycles?   (p.591) 
Economic cycles are periods where the economy expands and other periods where the economy stagnates or may even contract in the event of a recession. 
 
b)	What is the definition of a recession?   (p.591) 
Recessions are periods of economic downturn where the growth of an economy, namely its gross domestic product, is negative for at least two consecutive quarters. [Note: This definition is a common rule, however the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) defines a recession as “a significant decline in economic activity that is spread across the economy and that lasts more than a few months.” The NBER is the agency that officially declares U.S. recessions.] 
 
c)	Explain the purpose of leading market indicators.   (p.592) 
•	Develop an overall sentiment of economic prospects. 
•	Help determine whether a recession may be forthcoming. 
 
d)	Explain three leading market indicators.   (p.592) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Stock market levels - drops indicate expectations of declining demand or profitability 
•	Stock market volatility - high volatility indicates a higher level of uncertainty 
•	Money supply - decreases indicates lower spending and investment intentions 
•	Bond yields - flat of inverted yield curves indicate slowing growth and possible recession 
•	Consumer confidence - readings below 100 indicate pessimism and less willingness to spend 
•	Housing starts -  lower number indicates lower demand for construction and consumer goods 
•	Production activity - lower industrial purchases and inventories reflect a slowing economy 
•	Jobless claims - continued increases in jobless claims indicates a slowing economy 
•	Economic forecasts - available from reputable government institutions and major banks 
4. Credit risks 
 
a)	What are credit risks?   (p.594) 
Credit risks are the risks associated with collecting amounts due from customers and debtors. Every organization that sells products or services without getting paid up front or immediately upon making a sale, encounters credit risk. 
 
b)	Illustrate and explain how customer credit can be optimized.   (p.594) Opportunity cost - lost sales due to stringent payment terms. 
Carrying costs - cost of getting paid at a later time (accounts receivable). Total costs = opportunity cost + carrying cost. 
 
 
c)	Briefly explain the process steps of a credit management program.   (p.596) 
•	Collect information about customers - credit application form, contact information, banking information, references (three suppliers who authorize credit), financial statements. 
•	Establish credit limits - contact bank manager, check supplier references, obtain reports from credit agencies, examine financial statements, check credit ratings on debt securities. 
•	Establish payment terms - outline terms clearly on the invoice or contract, consider offering incentives for early payment, offer alternative payment methods to facilitate payments. 
•	Review and update credit arrangements - monitor account receivable balances and payment track record, manage customer relationships, maintain up-to-date agency credit information. 
•	Design a process for collecting bad debts - follow-up overdue accounts by phone, remain firm that payment is expected promptly, send friendly reminders by mail, escalate payment issues with a senior manager, stop shipments, contact collection agencies, consider legal action. 
 
d)	Explain what is a letter of credit.   (p.597) 
A letter of credit is a letter issued by a bank or government agency to a seller, at the request of a buyer, to guarantee payment to the seller for a stated amount. Banks provide this service for a fee, and may withhold funds or require collateral from the buyer to cover the [amount of the] letter of credit. In the event that the buyer fails to pay the seller, the seller has the right to demand payment directly from the bank by exercising the letter of credit.  
 
e)	Explain what is a conditional sales agreement.   (p.598) 
A conditional sales agreement, also known as conditional sales contract, is a contract where a buyer takes possession of goods or assets, but legal ownership of the goods or assets remains with the seller until the sale price is paid in full. The seller has the right to repossess the goods or assets if the buyer fails to pay the entire balance. Conditional sales agreements are normally used to sell goods or assets that buyers pay in installments over a specified duration outlined in the agreement. They are commonly offered to buyers of industrial machinery and equipment. 
f)	Describe three credit risk financing techniques.   (p.599) 
•	Factoring - Accounts receivable are sold at a discount to an intermediary called a factor. The factor advances funds in exchange for a right to collect the receivables. 
•	Credit insurance - Commercial insurance that offers protection against the non-payment of receivables. Typically used by sellers involved with exports (international sales). 
•	Credit default swaps - Derivative designed to mitigate the credit risk of a reference entity, in accordance with a notional amount. The buyer pays the seller a fee for transferring credit risk. 
 
5. Financing risks 
 
a)	What is financing risk?   (p.600) 
Financing risk, also known as funding risk, is the risk of not obtaining funds at acceptable costs, terms and conditions.  Financing risks may be caused by difficult external conditions such as tight credit markets during a recession, or challenging internal conditions such as a new company with limited revenues and collateral. 
 
b)	Explain how organizations mitigate financing risks.   (p.600) 
•	Business plan - Develop a credible business plan for investors and creditors. 
•	Capital structure - Maintain a prudent capital structure (avoid excessive debt) • Strong relationships - Meet lenders, provide information, answer questions, etc. 
•	Diversify funding sources - Do not rely on just a few sources of funding. 
 
6. Financial situation risks 
 
a)	What are financial situation risks?   (p.586) 
Financial situation risks can be defined as the ability to generate cash flow, meet financial obligations, and maintain a sound financial structure. 
 
b)	What causes financial situation risks?   (p.601) 
Financial situation risks are caused by insufficient operating cash flow, a lack of liquid assets, limited working capital, low profitability and excessive debt. These conditions fuel one another. They can lead to financial distress if they are not actively monitored and managed. 
 
c)	Briefly describe trend analysis and its purpose.   (p.603) 
•	Description - Trend analysis is the measurement and display of a tendency over time.  The trends can be measured and reported in a table format and displayed graphically. 
•	Purpose - It is typically used to analyze how account balances, results or ratios evolve.  
The purpose is to measure growth patterns, identify tendencies, detect inconsistencies, etc. 
 
d)	Describe two limitations of financial analysis.   (p.604-605) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Accounting information and policies – historical, not necessarily a good indication of the future, accounting forecasts may not be reliable, may not be comparable from one period to the next, subject to estimates and differences in accounting standards. 
•	Sources of income – organizations have varying sources of income that need to be isolated from one period to the next for comparing with prior results or with another organization. 
•	Organizational strategies – the effects of changes to strategies, or differences in strategies with other organizations need to be isolated when comparing financial results. 
•	Economic conditions – the effects of economic conditions such as economic growth, inflation, higher interest rates, recessions need to be taken into account as part of financial analysis. 
 
 
 
e)	How can organizations mitigate cash flow risks?   (p.606) 
Organizations mitigate cash flow risks by developing cash flow forecasts and budgets. Operating cash flow forecasts are developed by financial services, using sales estimates and budgets from marketing and sales, and production estimates and budgets from production managers, including estimates of fixed asset investments for production needs. Once the operating cash flow and investment needs are known, a cash budget can be developed to plan the investing and financing activities that use and generate cash. Organizations need to carefully plan and budget the timing of their cash flow in relation to all of their operating, investing and financing activities. 
 
f)	Describe the risks associated with hoarding cash.   (p.608) 
Some companies are criticized for hoarding cash, namely accumulating disproportionate amounts of cash, when it is perceived that they should be making strategic and operational investments, or increasing dividends to shareholders. When companies accumulate very large cash balances, senior executives are tempted to adopt riskier strategies and spend more to make questionable acquisitions. A lot of money can be wasted by management if excessive cash balances are perceived negatively by investors. 
 
7. Cost structure risks 
 
a)	What is cost structure risk?   (p.608-609) 
Cost structure is the proportion of variable and fixed costs of an organization. (…) Organizations with a higher proportion of fixed costs relative to variable costs have more financial risks because it is generally more difficult to reduce fixed costs than variable costs if sales decline. 
 
b)	Explain the concept and risk of operational leverage.   (p.609) 
Operational leverage is the [compounding] effect of sales increases on profitability, caused by higher proportions of fixed costs relative to variable costs. If two companies have the same total sales and total costs, the company with the higher proportion of fixed costs has more operational leverage. Operational leverage is a double-edge sword. When sales increase or decrease, a company with more leverage will experience greater variability in profit increases or decreases. 
 
c)	What trend is causing an increase in operational leverage?   (p.610) 
The trend for many companies is to have an increasingly greater proportion of fixed costs relative to variable costs. This trend is driven by automation, namely the replacement of workers with artificial intelligence computer systems and robotics able to perform tasks similar to humans. (…) Organizations must ensure that their investments have reliable expectations of return when making changes to their cost structure whenever these changes increase operational leverage. 
 
8. Capital structure risk 
 
a)	What is capital structure risk?  (p.610-611) 
Capital structure risk is the proportion of debt and shareholder equity. Organizations with a higher proportion of debt to shareholder equity have more financial risks because they have more financial obligations that must be met to avoid situations default on their financing. 
 
b)	Explain the factors influencing optimal debt levels.   (p.610) 
•	Lower cost of debt - Interest is tax deductible, while dividends are not. Creditors are willing to accept a lower rate of return (rate of interest) because they have less risk (more protection). 
•	Risk of financial distress - High debt levels cause greater financial obligations (interest, capital, refinancing). Organizations are not obliged to pay dividends or reimburse (buy-back) shares. 
 
 
 
c)	Explain the concept and risk of financial leverage.   (p.611) 
Financial leverage is the use of debt to finance new assets, with the expectation that using debt creates more value for existing shareholders than issuing additional equity. Financial leverage rests on the assumption that the return on investment from the new assets will exceed the cost of borrowing. The basics of financial leverage are to keep shareholder equity low by financing new assets with debt, thereby increasing the return on equity for existing shareholders. 
 
9. Financial distress 
 
a)	What is financial distress?   (p.613) 
Financial distress can be defined as a financial situation that makes it very difficult or impossible for an organization to meet its financial obligations and remain a going concern. 
 
b)	Briefly describe the three financial distress alternatives.   (p.613) 
•	Private workout - ask creditors to extend payment deadlines, relaxing conditions, etc. 
•	Bankruptcy filing - reorganization - ask creditors to renegotiate debt balances 
•	Bankruptcy filing - liquidation - petition the court for asset liquidation 
 
c)	How do creditors typically react to each alternative?   (p.613) 
•	Private workout - most creditors will agree to a workout if the distress seems temporary 
•	Bankruptcy filing - creditors assess if they are better off with a reorganization or liquidation 
 
10. Financial process risks 
 
a)	Define what is a financial process.   (p.614) 
Financial processes are the policies, practices and procedures for managing financial resources. The purpose of financial processes is to ensure that financial resources are properly allocated and managed to achieve organizational strategies and implement business plans. 
 
b)	Outline the cycle of financial processes.   (p.614) 
 
 
c)	Articulate a risk statement for financial process risks.   (p.614) 
The risks of ineffective policies, practices and procedures for managing financial resources, resulting in misguided resource allocations, lost or wasted resources, and unsatisfactory performance and results. 
 
 
 
 
 
11. Budgeting risks 
 
a)	Briefly describe the three types of budgets.   (p.615) 
•	Operational budget - revenues and expenses for achieving the business plan. 
•	Capital budget - resources needed for investments in tangible assets such as property and equipment, and intangible assets such as research and development, and computer software. 
•	Cash budget - cash flows and funding required to meet organizational needs.  
 
b)	Describe two risks encountered with budgeting and how to mitigate them.   (p.615-616) Students may choose from the following: 
Risks 	Mitigation 
Unsubstantiated requirements - no clear justification for the allocation base from year to year 	•	Activity-based budgeting - shed light on activities 
•	Zero-based budgeting - justify expenditures 
Excessive resource demands - natural tendency to demand more resources than really needed 	• Impose restrictions on budget allocations • Reward managers who improve productivity 
Obsolescence and lack of flexibility - obsolete by the time the year starts, no process for updating 	•	Perpetual / continuous budgets - revised quarterly 
•	Flexible budgets - adjusted for changing conditions 
Unclear accountabilities - budget line items that do not have clearly assigned responsibilities 	•	Every line item assigned to a specific manager 
•	Managers report variations and deviations 
Demotivating targets - targets imposed by senior executive perceived as too difficult to achieve 	• Participative budgeting approach - executives set goals, managers propose budgets, negotiations, approval 
Overly optimistic views - too optimistic or stay silent if others believe that it is achievable 	•	Scenarios - best case, expected case, worst case 
•	Probabilistic models for each scenarios 
 
12. Capital budgeting risks 
 
a)	What is capital budgeting?   (p.617) 
Capital budgeting is the analysis and decision-making processes for accepting or rejecting investments in long term assets or projects. 
 
b)	Describe capital budgeting risks.   (p.617-618) 
•	Managerial biases - Managers who propose or champion investments sometimes deliberately overstate benefits, understate costs, and shorten implementation timelines to convince senior executives that their investment proposals should be selected. 
•	Discounting rate challenges - Errors in calculating the risk-adjusted cost of capital for discounting pose major risks because: 
1)	the errors may results in negative value creation if unworthy projects are accepted because the risk-adjusted cost of capital is underestimated; and  
2)	the errors may result in forgone value creation if the risk-adjusted cost of capital is overestimated, and worthy investments or projects are not accepted. 
 
c)	Which capital budgeting analysis method is better and why?   (p.617) 
The best method for capital budgeting analysis is the net present value, because it discounts net future cash flows to account for the time value of money. 
 
d)	What is a risk-adjusted cost of capital?   (p.618) 
It is the cost of capital adjusted for taking into account the higher or lower risk of an investment or project. If the investment or project has a higher or lower risk than the organization as a whole, the cost of capital (used for discounting cash flows and calculate the net present value) should be adjusted higher or lower (as the case may be) to account for the risk difference. 
 
e)	What can happen if a discount rate is not properly determined?   (p.618) 
•	Underestimated rate - The error may results in negative value creation if unworthy projects are accepted because the risk-adjusted cost of capital is underestimated.  
•	Overestimated rate - The error may result in forgone value creation if the risk-adjusted cost of capital is overestimated, and worthy investments or projects are not accepted. 
 
f)	How can capital budgeting risks be mitigated?   (p.617-618) 
•	Managerial biases - Assign capital budgeting analyses to a separate group within financial services.  Validate managerial estimates by benchmarking with other organizations and getting independent expert advice. Conduct post-implementation audits to verify benefits and costs. Hold managers accountable for the accuracy of their estimates. 
•	Discounting rate challenges - Get financial experts to conduct a thorough and independent review of the cost of capital calculations. Adopt a structured process for analyzing the risks of individual investments and projects. Determine how to properly adjust the cost of capital for investments and projects that have a risk profile different from the organization. 
 
13. Accounting and reporting risks 
 
a)	Articulate a risk statement for accounting risks.   (p.619) 
Accounting risk can be defined as the risk of not properly recording financial transactions and reporting inaccurate financial information, resulting in misleading information, ineffective financial management and lost income. 
 
b)	Briefly describe three source of risk causing accounting risks.   (p.619) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Accounting and reporting standards - vary between countries 
•	Revenue recognition - complex contracts, goods and services completed over multiple years, variations of standards across industries based on the nature of their operations 
•	Product costing and production levels - allocation of fixed costs distorts the comparability of earnings if production and sales vary significantly from one year to the next 
•	Expense deferrals - reduce or increase discretionary spending from one year to the next 
•	Asset write-downs - doubtful accounts, inventory mark-downs, goodwill impairment 
•	Asset valuation - lower or cost or fair market value, or fair value accounting (IFRS 
•	Asset depreciation - estimates of useful life, salvage value and consumption rate 
•	Liability estimates - product returns, warranty claims, legal liabilities, contingent liabilities 
•	Accounting processes - proper segregation of duties, accounting and reporting controls 
 
c)	What is an accounting process?   (p.621) 
An accounting process is the methods, procedures and accounts used to capture, record and manage routine financial transactions taking place within a recurring cycle of activities. The most common accounting processes are: 1) sales, receivables, and receipts; 2) purchases, payables and payments; 3) salaries, wages and payrolls; 4) production, costing and inventories; 5) asset management; and 6) cash management. These processes are commonly referred to as cycles, namely the revenue cycle, purchasing cycle, payroll cycle, production cycle, etc. 
 
d)	Explain which responsibilities should be segregated in an accounting process.   (p.622) The following responsibilities should always be assigned to separate individuals: 
•	Custody of assets - inventory in a secure area, managed by a distinct group 
•	Shipping and receiving - separate from custody of assets and recording of transactions 
•	Recording of transactions - those recording transactions should not access cash or inventories 
•	Cash receipts and disbursements - different people from those recording transactions 
•	Reconciliations of accounts - separate people not involved with any of the above 
14. Monitoring and forecasting risks 
 
a)	What is monitoring?   (p.624) 
Monitoring is a risk control technique that detects situations, events or conditions in order to take corrective action before issues or problems arise. [In the context of financial management] the basic approach involves comparing actual results with budgets, measuring variances, determining the causes of variances, taking action to address problem situations, and developing forecasts to determine how financial results and situations are expected to evolve. 
 
b)	What is forecasting?   (p.624) 
Forecasting can be defined as a process that uses historical data to estimate future results. Forecasting may or may not involve the use of sophisticated modeling techniques. 
 
c)	Explain the variance analysis model using formulas.   (p.624) 
 
 
d)	Explain how the variance analysis model can be used in practice.   (p.624) 
In practice, the variance analysis model is mostly used to analyze variable production costs in a manufacturing environment. However, it can also be used to analyze sales of goods and services, and any kind of [operational or] discretionary spending that is uniform and repetitive. 
 
e)	What are the main reasons for inaccurate forecasts?   (p.625) 
Reasons for the poor accuracy of forecasts include: 1) the lack of integration between budgeting and forecasting; 2) not enough focus on the main variables affecting results; 3) relying too much on historical data instead of predictive metrics; and 4) not effectively engaging business units in developing reliable forecasts, and not providing effective forecasting tools. 
 
f)	What are rolling forecasts?   (p.625) 
Rolling forecasts are normally updated on a monthly basis for the next twelve months. 
 
15. Resource reallocation risks 
 
a)	What is resource reallocation?   (p.625) 
Resource reallocation is the process of shifting resources from one or more organizational units to others. (…) Organizations should analyze and adjust their allocation of resources across business lines the same way that investment funds manage securities in an investment portfolio. 
 
b)	What is the purpose of resource reallocation?   (p.625) 
The purpose of resource reallocation is to put financial resources to better use. It is typically done to unwind declining business lines, support new or evolving strategies, or take advantage of investment opportunities. 
 
 
c)	What are the top three barriers to reallocation according to executives?   (p.626) 
•	Inability to effectively analyze opportunities 
•	Lack of focus on organizational priorities 
•	Ineffective decision-making process 
 
d)	Which biases affect resource reallocation?   (p.626) 
Cognitive biases such as anchoring to the past, and loss aversion relating to the write-off of unproductive assets play an important role. Organizational politics and infighting for resources are other important factors. 
 
e)	Explain three attributes for an effective reallocation framework.   (p.627) 
•	Make strategies drive plans and budgets - reallocate resources to strategic priorities 
•	Identify and analyze investment priorities - reallocate to investment priorities 
•	Remove biases and conflict from decision-making - culture of collaborative reallocation 
•	Reward managers for downsizing - reward for profitably managing business line declines 
•	Monitor and make reallocations habitual - monitor strategies and investments, reallocate 
•	Develop useful financial information - reliable, timely, comparable, verifiable, relevant 
 
16. Fraud risks 
 
a)	What is fraud?   (p.627) 
Fraud is an intentional act or omission designed to deceive others, resulting in the victim suffering a loss and/or the perpetrator achieving a gain.  It is characterized by deceit, concealment, and violation of trust. (…) Fraud is a criminal act. It is a violation of trust with the intent to steal or gain an advantage. 
 
b)	Why is fraud typically perpetrated?   (p.627) 
Fraud is perpetrated either: 1) to obtain money, property or services; 2) to avoid a payment or a loss of services; or 3) to secure a personal or business advantage. 
 
c)	What is the full cost of fraud?   (p.627) 
It is estimated that organizations lose five percent of their annual revenues to fraud on average. However, the full cost of fraud is bigger than [what is actually lost to fraudsters]. The full cost of fraud includes its impact on time, productivity, reputation, and stakeholder relationships. 
 
d)	Briefly explain the fraud triangle.   (p.627-628) 
The probability of fraud is driven by three factors commonly known as the fraud triangle.  The combination of these factors makes fraud very likely. 
•	Motive - the incentive or pressure that causes someone to want to do a fraud. 
•	Opportunity - the ability to commit fraud without being caught. 
•	Rationalization - the ability to ignore or remove guilt from conscience. 
 
e)	What are the three main categories of occupational fraud?   (p.628) 
•	Asset misappropriation 
•	Corruption schemes 
•	Financial statement misrepresentation 
 
f)	Give two examples of fraud for each category of occupational fraud.   (p.628) 
•	Asset misappropriation - forged cheques, false supplier invoices 
•	Corruption schemes - money laundering, bribes to a customer 
•	Financial statement misrepresentation - fictitious revenues, understated expenses 
 
 
g)	Explain three components of a fraud risk management program.   (p.629) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Governance - tone at the top, audit committee oversight, leadership 
•	Policies - fraud policy, fraud risk management program, investigation process 
•	Risk assessment - assessment of inherent and residual risks of fraud 
•	Process design - analysis of processes, transactions and controls to prevent or detect 
•	Internal controls - segregation of duties, numbering and matching of documents 
•	Audits - consider the risk of fraud, assess the effectiveness of controls 
•	Whistleblowing - process to receive tips from internal or external sources 
•	Investigations - process to evaluate and investigate allegations 
•	Sanctions - punishment and prosecution of fraudsters 
 
h)	Explain fidelity insurance.   (p.629) 
Fidelity insurance covers losses or damages due to employee fraud. The coverage may be for specific individuals, classes of employees, or all employees at large. It normally covers only asset losses, such as theft of money or inventory. It does not usually compensate for missed opportunities.  Evidence of the fraud and losses must be provided to the insurer. 
 
 
Other Short Answer Questions 
 
1.	What are the three main branches of financial management functions?   (p.587) 
•	Financial planning and budgeting (director) 
•	Treasury operations (treasurer) 
•	Accounting and reporting (controller) 
 
2.	What certifications are required by chief executive officers and chief financial officers of publiclytraded companies in the context of financial reporting?   (p.588) 
Chief executive officers and chief financial officers of publicly-traded companies must certify that: 
•	They are responsible for internal controls over financial reporting. 
•	The controls over financial reporting have been evaluated and are sound. 
•	They are responsible for the preparation of financial statements. 
•	The financial statements have been independently audited. 
 
3.	Is there an optimal strategy for managing market risks?  Please explain.   (p.590) 
There is no definitive approach or rule for determining an optimal strategy for managing market risks. Organizations have to decide the level of risk that they are willing to assume. The level of risk is based on the size of the exposures, the expected volatility of rates or prices, the potential effects of these variations, and the effectiveness and costs of the mitigating solutions.  Some organization mitigate market risks as much as possible, while others adopt a middle of the road approach where only a portion of their exposures are mitigated. Organizations without significant market risk exposures often decide to accept their exposures without mitigation. 
 
4.	What risks are specific to the use of derivatives?   (p.590-591) 
•	Under or over mitigation risk - exposures are based on estimates that may not be accurate. 
•	Liquidity and counterparty risks - forwards and swaps are not guaranteed by exchanges. 
•	Basis risks - futures and options may not perfectly match organizational needs. 
•	Complexity - need to have expertise, follow what competitors do, educate board members. 
 
5.	What is rogue trading and how can it be mitigated?   (p.591) 
Rogue trading is unauthorized trading by employees who speculate or cover risk management errors. Roles and responsibilities for the authorization and execution of trades in securities (including derivatives) must be carefully assigned. It is imperative that strong internal controls are established to prevent rogue trading. All trade orders received by investment dealers should require at least two signatures, or a separate confirmation by a supervisor before they are executed. No single person should be able to order or execute trades on their own, whether verbally or via a computer. 
 
6.	What organizations are particularly at risk in the event of a recession?   (p.592) 
During a recession, companies that are ill-prepared can suffer severe consequences and even go bankrupt. Organizations that have a high proportion of fixed costs, and a lot of maturing debt obligations are particularly vulnerable, especially if they offer non-essential goods and services. 
 
7.	How should organizations anticipate and prepare for a recession?   (p.592-593) 
•	Monitor leading economic indicators, especially those relevant to their context. 
•	Develop a contingency plan when leading indicators indicate that a recession is coming. o Plan cost reduction initiatives, define triggering events, assign responsibilities. o Take advantage of potential investment opportunities (e.g. buy assets at bargain prices). o Establish a committee of senior executives for overseeing implementation of the plan. 
 
8.	Explain the delicate balance associated with customer credit.   (p.594) 
Sellers have to maintain a delicate balance. They must provide payment terms agreeable to their customers, while avoiding non-payment risks. If payment terms are too stringent, customers may decide to buy elsewhere. Alternatively, if the terms are too lenient, sellers may wait a long time to get paid, and may have cash flow and collection problems. Neither scenario is acceptable.  
 
9.	Explain why uncollectible accounts can have major implication on profitability.  (p.594) The non-collection of accounts receivable can have a major implication on profitability, especially when profit margins are slim. For example, an organization with a profit margin of five percent needs to make sales of twenty million dollars to compensate for bad debts of one million dollars. In this case, it can be argued that collecting one million dollars is as important as selling for twenty million. 
 
10.	Explain why customer credit management should be segregated from marketing and sales.   (p.595) Credit management should be segregated from marketing and sales, because these functions are in a conflict of interest regarding customer credit. Their incentives are often to maximize sales (not collect amounts due). Moreover, their proximity to customers makes them vulnerable to accepting terms that may not be in the interest of the organization. 
 
11.	Explain when alternative payment terms such as letters of credit should be used.   (p.596) 
When new and large customers are not very well known, and especially if they are in foreign markets where it is difficult to obtain reliable references, it is advisable for sellers to adopt more stringent payment terms until a reliable business relationship is established. Alternative payment terms commonly used for international sales include promissory notes, letters of credit, documentary collections, bankers acceptances and commercial drafts. 
 
12.	What is a mortgage agreement?   (p.598) 
A mortgage agreement is a secured loan that pledges a specific asset or property as collateral or security for the loan. Contrary to popular belief, a mortgage is not the loan itself, but rather the lien on the property that secures the loan. A lien is a legal right granted by the owner of an asset or property, or granted by a law, or otherwise acquired by a creditor as a result of a contractual default by an owner. If the loan terms and conditions (including payments) are not met, the seller or creditor has the right to seize the asset subject to the lien, and proceed with selling it to another buyer. 
 
13.	What is the difference between a line of credit and term loan?   (p.600) 
•	Line of credit - revolving loan that allows to draw funds as needed up to a limit. 
•	Term loan - a fixed amount loan that is repayable in regular (monthly) installments. 
 
14.	What is a bond?   (p.600) 
A bond is a debt agreement between a borrower and an investor. Most bonds are issued as negotiable securities, although they may be issued privately to selected investors. Bonds are issued at a premium or discount price, based on their interest rate versus the prevailing market rates. Bonds are normally issued for long durations such as ten years or more. The principal is usually payable only at the maturity date of the bond. Bonds can have many different terms and conditions that may or may not be attractive to investors (e.g. may be convertible into shares at the option of investors). 
 
15.	What alternative sources of funding are used by start-up companies?   (p.601) 
To get financing, start-up companies sometimes resort to alternative sources of funding such as venture capitalists, private equity funds, hedge funds, and business development banks. 
 
16.	What does it mean to diversify funding sources to mitigate financing risks?   (p.600) 
Diversifying funding sources means not relying on just a few sources of funding. It is done by getting lenders and investors to compete at offering funding solutions at competitive costs (competitive rates), and favorable terms and conditions. 
 
17.	How may competitors react when a company experiences financial situation risks?   (p.601) What is the best defense to guard against financial risks? 
When an organization experiences financial challenges, competitors take note. They may adopt aggressive marketing strategies aimed at trying to eliminate competition. Although these tactics are disloyal and may be legally challenged by filing complaints to government agencies that regulate fair competition, the reality is that such behavior does take place, and motives may be very difficult to prove. The best defense of an organization is to maintain a healthy financial situation at all times. 
 
18.	What is ratio analysis, and how does it help mitigate financial situation risks?   (p.602) 
•	Description - Ratio analysis is a calculation that uses a numerator and a denominator to calculate a proportion for analysis. Depending on the numerator and denominator, the proportion may be expressed as a multiple, a percentage, a number of days, etc.  
•	Mitigation - Ratio analysis helps measure whether financial account balances and results behave consistently with expectations. They also help detect problem situations that require intervention. 
 
19.	What is the difference between trend analysis and comparative analysis?   (p.603-604) 
•	Trend analysis - Trend analysis is the measurement and display of a tendency over time.  It is typically used to analyze how account balances, results or ratios evolve.  
•	Comparative analysis - Comparative analysis, also known as benchmarking, is the practice of contrasting results, processes or practices with other organizations. The purpose of comparative analysis is to identify differences, inconsistencies, anomalies and improvement opportunities. 
 
20.	What is a contribution margin, and what can it be used for?   (p.608) 
A contribution margin is the difference between sales and variable costs. It is used for cost-volumeprofit analysis and to calculate the breakeven point in dollars and units. 
 
21.	Explain the trade-off theory of capital structure.   (p.601) 
Conceptually, the use of debt lowers the cost of capital and increases the market value of an organization, but only up to the point where the risk of financial distress begins to offset the benefits of debt.  This equation is known as the trade-off theory of capital structure. 
 
22.	Explain why companies tend to have a similar debt-to-equity ratio within an industry.   (p.612) 
•	Types of assets - industries with tangible fixed assets can borrow more easily at a lower cost. 
•	Operating income - industries with predictable cash flows can borrow more at a lower cost. 
•	Income taxes - profitable industries taxed at a higher rate benefit more from interest deductibility. 
 
23.	Explain how a debt portfolio should be managed similarly to an investment portfolio.   (p.612) Organizations must carefully plan and manage their debt portfolio. In doing so, they can apply principles that are similar to the management of investment portfolios.  
•	Suitable mix of short and long term debt - avoid liquidity and working capital deficiencies. 
•	Diversified debt sources - avoid excessive reliance on a few creditors, make them compete. 
•	Varied long term debt maturities - avoid having to refinance too much at the same time. 
 
24.	Explain how paying dividends and buying back shares increases financial risks.   (p.613) Paying dividends and buying back shares decrease shareholder equity, and therefore increase financial leverage. Companies with excessive cash should look at their entire capital structure and reimburse debt where necessary if they wish to maintain a consistent debt-to-equity ratio. 
 
25.	Explain the importance of budgets as a planning tool and control mechanisms.   (p.615) 
•	Planning tool - communicate financial objectives, outline use of resources, facilitate coordination 
•	Control mechanism - monitor results vs plans, accountability for targets, course corrections 
 
26.	Explain the budgeting risk of unsubstantiated requirements and how to mitigate this risk.   (p.615) 
•	Explanation - Resources allocated based on prior year adjusted for inflation, new activities or initiatives. No clear justification for the allocation base, no reallocations for better use. 
•	Mitigation - Activity-based budgeting to shed light on how resources are used, and zero-based budgeting to demonstrate and justify how each major activity creates value. 
 
27.	Explain the budgeting risk of demotivating targets and how to mitigate this risk.   (p.616) 
•	Explanation - managers may resent budgets and targets imposed by executives - budgets too difficult to achieve, unclear about the rationale or how to set priorities for achieving them. 
•	Mitigation - participative budgeting approach - executives set goals, managers propose plans and budgets, executives review and propose changes, negotiations until there is agreement. 
 
28.	What are the essential characteristics for financial information to be useful?   (p.619) In order to be useful, financial information needs to be: 
•	Reliable - The information is valid (real), complete and accurate. 
•	Timely - The information is available on a timely basis. 
•	Comparable - The information is presented in a consistent format. 
•	Verifiable - The information can be independently audited. 
•	Relevant - The information is meaningful in relation to user needs. 
 
29.	Explain how the budget variance analysis model can be adapted to any organization.   (p.624) 
•	In practice, the variance analysis model is mostly used to analyze variable production costs in a manufacturing environment. However, it can also be used to analyze sales of goods and services, and any kind of [operational or] discretionary spending that is uniform and repetitive.  
•	The model can be adapted to government entities or not-for-profit organizations that produce or deliver standardized goods or services. Such entities and organizations include municipalities, hospitals, school boards, police services, etc. It is just a matter of developing an approach that separates total variances into price variances and quantity variances. 
 
30.	Explain which element of the fraud triangle that organizations influence the most.   (p.628) Opportunity is the element that organizations can influence the most.  Limiting opportunities requires a combination of risk management actions and controls that help prevent and detect fraud. Fraudsters are unlikely to attempt to commit fraud if they think that there is a good chance they will be caught, and if they know that the consequences are going to be severe. 
 
 
Multiple Choice Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Financial management is: 
a)	The processes, activities and methods for managing financial investments to achieve diversification and optimal portfolio returns on financial assets. 
b)	The management of cash and short term investments to meet working capital obligations, including the payment of suppliers and other liabilities. 
c)	The preparation of budgets and forecasts to determine cash flows and make financing decisions to secure the financial resources needed by the organization. 
d)	The processes, activities and methods for managing financial resources to achieve organizational goals, and for reporting financial results to stakeholders. e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.586 
2. External financial risks include: 
a)	Financial situation risks, financial process risks and accounting risks. 
b)	Market risks, credit risks and financing risks. 
c)	Interest rate risks, exchange rate risks, and profitability risks 
d)	Commodity price risks, economic cycle risks and budgeting risks. 
e)	Cash flow risks, working capital risks and capital structure risks f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	b) 	p.586 
3. The dual roles of financial management functions are: 
a)	Facilitators and auditors. 
b)	Financial planning and budgeting. 
c)	Enablers and controllers. 
d)	Accounting and reporting. 
e)	Treasury and cash management. 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.587 
4. The three main branches of financial management functions are: 
a)	Market risks, credit risks, financing risks. 
b)	Enablers, controllers, auditors. 
c)	Financial management, accounting, auditing. 
d)	Budgeting, accounting, controlling. 
e)	Financial planning, accounting, reporting. 
f)	None of the above. 	f) 	p. 
5. Market risks can be defined as: 
a)	The risk of investment portfolios caused by variations in stock market prices. 
b)	The risks associated with collecting amounts due from customers and debtors. 
c)	The risk having to do with the ability to borrow money or raise funds. 
d)	The external conditions that create trade and borrowing uncertainties. 
e)	The ability to generate cash flow in order to meet financial obligations. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.589 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
6. The five basic steps for managing market risks are: 
a)	Forecast the exposure, decide on a policy, purchase derivatives, authorize the trading, and evaluate results. 
b)	Measure the exposure, develop a model, measure the net effects of variations,  select the right techniques, and control the execution. 
c)	Define risk appetite, develop a risk profile, evaluate the exposures, develop an action plan, and monitor the results. 
d)	Analyze the exposure, decide on a policy, select the right techniques, control the execution, and monitor results. 
e)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.589 
7. Rogue trading is: 
a)	The theft of investment securities done by unscrupulous stock market brokers. 
b)	Short selling stocks when markets are going up, resulting in huge losses. 
c)	The illegal practice of trading stock on the basis of confidential information. 
d)	Unauthorized trading done by employees who speculate or cover errors. 
e)	Purchasing investment securities outside of market hours. 
f)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.591 
8. Economic cycles are: 
a)	The stages that an organization goes through such as growth, maturity, decline. 
b)	Periods of high inflation, followed by higher interest rates, and recessions. 
c)	Stock market levels increase (bull market) followed by declines (bear markets). 
d)	Periods of economic expansion, followed by periods of stagnation or contraction. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.591 
9. A recession is commonly defined as:   (select all that apply) 
a)	A period of economic downturn where indicators such as consumer confidence, housing starts, production activity and jobless claims indicate a slowdown. 
b)	A period of economic downturn where the growth of an economy, namely its gross domestic product, is negative for at least two consecutive quarters. 
c)	A period where stock markets have declined by more than twenty percent. 
d)	A shrinkage of money supply caused by higher interest rates and less borrowing. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.591 
10. Leading market indicators include: 
a)	Stock market levels and stock market volatility. 
b)	Money supply and bond yields. 
c)	Consumer confidence and jobless claims. 
d)	Housing starts and production activity. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.592 
11. Leading market indicators help organizations:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Develop an overall sentiment of economic prospects. 
b)	Determine whether a recession may be forthcoming. 
c)	Develop a contingency plan in preparation for a recession. 
d)	Develop a budget and forecast for cost-cutting initiatives. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.592 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
12. Factors that make organizations particularly vulnerable to recessions include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	A high proportion of variable costs. 
b)	A lot of maturing debt obligations. 
c)	Offering non-essential goods and services. 
d)	Having many unionized employees. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	b) 
c) 	p.592 
13. Organizations can prepare in advance for periods of recession by: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Laying-off non-essential workers and recycling slow moving inventory. 
b)	Selling stock market investments in anticipation of possible declines. 
c)	Monitoring leading market indicators and economic forecasts. 
d)	Developing a contingency plan that includes cost-cutting initiatives. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.592-593 
14. Credit risks are: 
a)	The risks associated with making sales using credit cards. 
b)	The risks having to do with obtaining enough financing from a bank. 
c)	The risks of not being able to pay amounts due on a timely basis. 
d)	The risks associated with collecting amounts due from customers and debtors. 
e)	The risks of not being credited an amount for the return of merchandise. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.594 
15. The process steps of a credit management program are: 
a)	Collect banking information, determine credit limits, negotiate payment terms, review and update account arrangements, and take legal action for bad debts. 
b)	Analyze customer information, determine credit arrangements, review overdue accounts, contact customers, and send delinquent accounts to collection agencies. 
c)	Collect customer information, establish credit limits and payment terms, review  and update credit arrangements, and design a process for collecting bad debts. 
d)	Review customer accounts, obtain credit agency reports, update credit terms and conditions, monitor account balances, and design a process for collecting bad debts. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.596 
16. Customer credit should be segregated from marketing and sales because: 
a)	These functions are in a conflict of interest regarding customer credit. 
b)	Marketing and sales may not agree on customer credit decisions. 
c)	Financial services has a better understanding of customer account balances. 
d)	Customers may not want to deal with marketing and sales for credit. 
e)	Sales may provide customer credit that is not consistent with marketing policies. f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.595 
17. Alternative payment terms such as letters of credit should be used when: 
a)	A credit management program has been established, and letters of reference from bankers and suppliers are required  for opening up a new customer account. 
b)	Customers have a tendency to pay their invoices after more than 30 days. 
c)	New and large customers are not very well known, and especially if they are in foreign markets where it is difficult to obtain reliable references. 
d)	Customers are unwilling or unable to pay goods and services before delivery. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.596 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
18. A document issued by a bank or government agency to a seller, at the request of a buyer, to guarantee payment to the seller for a stated amount is called: a) A promissory note. 
b)	A letter of credit. 
c)	A documentary collection. 
d)	A banker’s acceptance. 
e)	A commercial draft. 
f)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.597 
19. An arrangement where a bank collect funds from a buyer in exchange for shipping documents (for goods to be claimed at customs) is called: a) A promissory note. 
b)	A letter of credit. 
c)	A documentary collection. 
d)	A banker’s acceptance. 
e)	A commercial draft. 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.597 
20. A conditional sales agreement is: 
a)	A secured loan with a lien that pledges property as collateral or security. 
b)	A contract that outlines terms under which one party agrees sell or lease property to another, in return for payments made in monthly installments. 
c)	A secured loan where a seller pledges inventories as security for their loan. 
d)	A contract where a buyer takes possession of goods or assets, but legal ownership  of the goods or assets remains with the seller until the sale price is paid in full. e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.598 
21. A mortgage is: 
a)	A secured loan with a lien that pledges property as collateral or security. 
b)	A contract that outlines terms under which one party agrees to buy or rent property to another, in return for payments made in monthly installments. 
c)	A secured loan where a seller pledges inventories as security for their loan. 
d)	A contract where a buyer takes possession of goods or assets, but legal ownership  of the goods or assets remains with the seller until the sale price is paid in full. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.598 
22. Factoring is:  
a)	A model that estimates market risks and credit risks by factoring market conditions that may cause an entity to default on their debts and go bankrupt. 
b)	The sale of accounts receivable at a discount to an intermediary who accepts to advance funds in exchange for the right to collect the receivables. 
c)	A type of insurance that offers protection against the non-payment of receivables.  It is typically used by sellers involved with exports (international sales). 
d)	A derivative designed to mitigate the credit risk of a reference entity, in accordance with a notional amount. The buyer pays the seller a fee for transferring credit risk. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.599 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
23. Credit insurance is: 
a)	A credit obtained from a retrospective rating insurance plan that adjust rates retroactively in the event that no claims are made during the policy period. 
b)	The sale of accounts receivable at a discount to an insurer who accepts to compensate the seller in the event that customers may pay in full. 
c)	A type of insurance that offers protection against the non-payment of receivables.  It is Typically used by sellers involved with exports (international sales). 
d)	A type of insurance derivative that mitigates the credit risk of a reference entity,  in accordance with a notional amount. The buyer pays a fee to the insurer. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.599 
24. Financing risk is: 
a)	The risk of investment portfolios caused by variations in stock market prices. 
b)	The risks associated with collecting amounts due from customers and debtors. 
c)	The risk of not obtaining funds at acceptable costs, terms and conditions. 
d)	The external conditions that create trade and borrowing uncertainties. 
e)	The ability to generate cash flow in order to meet financial obligations. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.600 
25. Financing risks can be mitigated by:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Developing a credible business plan for investors and creditors. 
b)	Maintaining a prudent capital structure (avoid excessive debt) 
c)	Maintaining strong relationships with investors and debtors. 
d)	Diversifying funding sources. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.600 
26. A line of credit is: 
a)	A document issued by a bank to guarantee payment to a seller. 
b)	A type of insurance that offers protection against the non-payment of receivables. 
c)	A loan that pledges specific assets or property as collateral or security for the loan. 
d)	A fixed amount loan that is repayable in regular (monthly) installments. 
e)	A revolving loan that allows to draw funds as needed up to a limit. f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.600 
27. A bond is: 
a)	A debt agreement that is typically issued as an investment security. 
b)	A type of insurance that covers losses or damages due to employee fraud.  
c)	An obligation to pay a sum of money at a specified time when conditions are met. 
d)	A derivative that is purchased by investors to mitigate market risks. 
e)	An unsecured promissory note to obtain short term financing. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) or c) 	p.600 
p.226 
28. Financial situation risk is: 
a)	The external conditions that create trade and borrowing uncertainties. 
b)	The risk of not having enough money to pay employees and suppliers after debts are reimbursed, resulting in organizational bankruptcy. 
c)	The risk of not obtaining funds at acceptable costs, terms and conditions. 
d)	The ability to generate cash flow in order to meet financial obligations and  maintain a sound financial structure. 
e)	The risk of not accurately reporting the financial situation in annual reports. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.586 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
29. Financial situation risks are caused by: 
a)	External conditions that create economic slowdowns and recessions. 
b)	Inability to borrow money at acceptable terms and conditions, or inability to  issue enough share capital to attract investments for capital expenditures. 
c)	Insufficient operating cash flow, lack of liquid assets, limited working capital,  low profitability and excessive debt. 
d)	Errors in financial statements leading to regulatory fines and stakeholder lawsuits. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.601 
30. In the context of financial management, trend analysis is: 
a)	The analysis of trends and changing conditions that are sources of risks. 
b)	Using a numerator and a denominator to calculate a proportion for analysis. 
c)	The measurement and display of a tendency over time. 
d)	The practice of contrasting or comparing results with other organizations  
e)	The development of a regression analysis model that measures cause and effect. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.603 
31. In the context of financial management, comparative analysis is: 
a)	The analysis of trends and changing conditions that are sources of risks. 
b)	Using a numerator and a denominator to calculate a proportion for analysis. 
c)	The measurement and display of a tendency over time. 
d)	The practice of contrasting or comparing results with other organizations  
e)	The development of a regression analysis model that measures cause and effect. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.603 
32. Hoarding cash is a source of risk because: 
a)	Senior executives may be tempted to increases their bonuses. 
b)	Shareholders view it negatively and organizational reputation is tarnished. 
c)	Greater amounts of cash attract rogue traders and unscrupulous brokers. 
d)	Senior executives may be tempted to make riskier investments to avoid criticism. 
e)	Excessive cash on hand diminishes return on equity. 
f)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.608 
33. Cost structure risk is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Based on the proportion of variable and fixed costs of an organization. 
b)	Driven by the proportion of debt versus equity that an organization has. 
c)	Reflected by the higher or lower breakeven point of an organization. 
d)	Measured as the total fixed costs that an organization is unable to reduce. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.608-609 
34. Operational leverage can be defined as:   (select all that apply) 
a)	The ability to increase sales with the same level of production capacity. 
b)	The compounding effect of sales increases on profitability, driven by higher proportions of fixed costs relative to variable costs. 
c)	The ability to increase production beyond a given level of production capacity. 
d)	The use of debt to finance the purchase of assets, with the expectation that using debt creates more value for existing shareholders than issuing additional equity. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.609 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
35. A contribution margin is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Used for cost-volume-profit analyses. 
b)	The difference between total sales and total fixed costs. 
c)	Used to calculate breakeven points in dollars and units. 
d)	The difference between sales and cost of goods sold. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.608-609 
36. Capital structure risk is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Based on the proportion of variable and fixed costs of an organization. 
b)	Driven by the proportion of debt versus equity that an organization has. 
c)	Reflected by the higher or lower breakeven point of an organization. 
d)	Measured as the total fixed costs that an organization is unable to reduce. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.610-611 
37. The factors influencing optimal debt levels are:   (select all that apply) 
a)	The lower cost of capital and the higher cost of equity. 
b)	The liquidity of fixed assets and the risk of financial distress. 
c)	The amount of operational leverage and financial leverage. 
d)	The lower cost of debt and the risk of financial distress. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.610 
38. Financial leverage can be defined as:   (select all that apply) 
a)	The ability to increase sales with the same level of production capacity. 
b)	The compounding effect of sales increases on profitability, driven by higher proportions of fixed costs relative to variable costs. 
c)	The ability to increase production beyond a given level of production capacity. 
d)	The use of debt to finance the purchase of assets, with the expectation that using debt creates more value for existing shareholders than issuing additional equity. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.611 
39. Companies in the same industry tend to have a similar debt-to-equity ratio because: 
a)	Their variable costs and fixed costs are proportionately the same. 
b)	Their ability to borrow more or less easily, and at a lower or higher cost is similar. 
c)	Their operational and financial leverage tend to be the same. 
d)	Their market and financial strategies are from the same playbook. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.612 
40. Paying dividends and buying back shares increase financial risks because: 
a)	Companies often have to borrow to pay dividends or buy-back shares. 
b)	These actions decrease shareholder equity and increase financial leverage. 
c)	Those payments may not be sustainable and stopping them is not an option. 
d)	Some creditors may not want to fund the organization if dividends are paid. 
e)	Paying dividends or buying back shares does not increase financial risks. 	b) 	p.613 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
41. Financial distress can be defined as: 
a)	A financial situation that makes it very difficult or impossible for an organization to remain profitable while continuing to grow to meet customer demand. 
b)	A lack of cash flow that prevents the payment of dividends to shareholders. 
c)	A financial situation that cause stress and anxiety to board members and managers. 
d)	A petition by creditors that the organization needs to file for bankruptcy. 
e)	A financial situation that makes it very difficult or impossible for an organization to meet its financial obligations and remain a going concern. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.613 
42. The three financial distress alternatives are: 
a)	Private workout, and bankruptcy filing (reorganization or liquidation). 
b)	Debt relief from creditors, payment deadline extension, and reduced conditions. 
c)	Private workout, bankruptcy protection, and liquidation of assets. 
d)	Cancellation of debt, liquidation of assets, and bankruptcy filing. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.613 
43. A bankruptcy filing for reorganization means that: 
a)	The organization will reorganize its management structure. 
b)	The organization will sell business lines or assets to pay off debts. 
c)	The organization will ask creditors to extend payment deadlines. 
d)	The organization will ask creditors to renegotiated loans and accept loan losses. 
e)	The organization will ask shareholders for additional capital. 
f)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.613 
44. Financial processes can be defined as: 
a)	The methods for managing cash and short term investments. 
b)	The allocation of resources for implementing a business plan. 
c)	The policies, practices and procedures for managing financial resources. 
d)	The accounting and reporting of financial transactions and statements. 
e)	The accounting, monitoring and reporting of financial transactions. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.614 
45. The cycle of financial processes is: 
a)	Purchases, inventories, accounts payable and payments. 
b)	Production, sales, accounts receivable and cash receipts. 
c)	Budgeting, accounting, monitoring, forecasting and resource reallocations. 
d)	Strategy, business planning, budgeting, and forecasting. 
e)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.614 
46. Select the statement that best defines financial process risks: 
a)	The risks of ineffective budgeting and accounting errors, resulting in resource misallocations, and erroneous reports to stakeholders. 
b)	The risks of external conditions that create trade and borrowing uncertainties, resulting in financial management challenges for the organization. 
c)	The risks related to the processing of financial transactions, and the reporting of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and contingencies, resulting in losses of assets and erroneous information to stakeholders. 
d)	The risks of ineffective policies, practices and procedures for managing financial resources, resulting in misguided resource allocations, lost or wasted resources,  and unsatisfactory performance and results. 	d) 	p.614 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
47. An operational budget: 
a)	Outlines the allocation of resources for implementing a business plan. 
b)	Outlines the revenues and expenses expected based on the business plan. 
c)	Outlines the resources needed for investments in assets. 
d)	Estimates the timing of cash flows, and plans the funding sources needed. 
e)	Estimates customer demand to help develop a master production plan. f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.615 
48. A capital budget: 
a)	Outlines the allocation of resources for implementing a business plan. 
b)	Outlines the revenues and expenses expected based on the business plan. 
c)	Outlines the resources needed for investments in assets. 
d)	Estimates the timing of cash flows and plans the sources of funding needed. 
e)	Estimates how much shareholder capital should be issued and when. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.615 
49. The budgeting risk of unsubstantiated requirements occurs when: 
a)	Budget items are not specifically assigned to managers responsible for them. 
b)	Managers request too much financial resources than what is really needed. 
c)	Budgets are not updated to reflect new resource allocations during the year. 
d)	Targets imposed by senior executives do not appear to be substantiated. 
e)	There is no clear justification for the allocation base from one year to the next. f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.615 
50. The budgeting risk of demotivating targets occurs when: 
a)	Budget targets are not specifically assigned to the right managers. 
b)	Managers request too much financial resources than what is really needed. 
c)	Budgets are not updated to reflect more demanding targets during the year. 
d)	Budget targets are imposed by senior executives without much consultation. 
e)	There is no clear justification for budget amounts from one year to the next. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.616 
51. Capital budgeting risks include: 
a)	Managerial biases in providing estimates of costs and benefits. 
b)	Senior executives not being aware of proposed capital investments. 
c)	Challenges with coming up with a valid calculation of the cost of capital. 
d)	Difficulties to integrate the capital budget with the operational budget. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.617-618 
52. Capital budgeting risks can be mitigated by:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Assigning capital budgeting analyses to a separate group within financial services. 
b)	Validating managerial estimates by benchmarking with other organizations. 
c)	Conducting post-implementation audits to verify actual benefits and costs. 
d)	Holding managers accountable for the accuracy of their estimates. 
e)	Getting financial experts to review cost of capital calculations and risk adjustments. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	f) 	p.617-618 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
53. The best method for capital budgeting is: 
a)	The payback period method. 
b)	The average accounting rate of return method. 
c)	The internal rate of return method. 
d)	The business case method. 
e)	The net present value method. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.617 
54. The risk-adjusted cost of capital is: 
a)	The cost of capital adjusted for differences in risk-free rates over time. 
b)	The cost of capital adjusted for the risk profile of the organization. 
c)	The cost of capital adjusted for the risk of an investment or project.  
d)	The cost of capital adjusted for differences in credit ratings over time. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.618 
55. Select the best statement that defines accounting risks: 
a)	The risk of errors in the application of accounting principles and methods, resulting  in financial statements that are misleading, ineffective financial management and loss of stakeholder confidence. 
b)	The risk that financial information may not be useful, reliable, timely, comparable, verifiable and relevant, resulting in irrelevant and inaccurate financial reporting, misleading information and stakeholder lawsuits. 
c)	The risk of not properly managing and recording financial transactions, and reporting inaccurate financial information, resulting in misleading information, ineffective financial management and lost income. 
d)	The risk that internal and external financial statements may not be auditable, resulting in negative audit opinions, loss of confidence, and depressed share prices. 	c) 	p.619 
56. The essential characteristics of useful financial information are: 
a)	Reliable, comparable, meaningful, verifiable, relevant 
b)	Valid, timely, error free, comparable, meaningful 
c)	Reliable, timely, comparable, verifiable, relevant 
d)	Timely, comparable, essential, verifiable, meaningful 
e)	Relevant, comparable, useful, timely, good quality 
f)	Acceptable, comparable, viable, sustainable, agreeable 	c) 	p.619 
57. An accounting process is best defined as: 
a)	An information system used for processing transactions and reporting information. 
b)	A method for recording transactions and producing reports on a monthly basis 
c)	A set of journals, ledgers and sub-ledgers used to record financial transactions. 
d)	The methods, procedures and accounts used to capture, record and manage routine financial transactions taking place within a recurring cycle of activities. e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.621 
58. Accounting tasks that should be segregated from one another include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Custody of assets segregated from shipping and receiving. 
b)	Shipping and receiving segregated from recording of transactions. 
c)	Recording of transactions segregated from cash receipts and disbursements 
d)	Cash receipts and disbursements segregated from reconciliation of accounts 
e)	Reconciliation of accounts segregated from all other tasks. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	f) 	p.622 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
59. In the context of financial management, the monitoring process is best described as: 
a)	Comparing actual results with budgets, determining the causes and consequences of the variances, identifying the issues or risks involved, taking action to mitigate risks, and developing forecasts to help identify additional variances on a timely basis. 
b)	Analyzing budget variances, identifying the causes of variances, updating budgets to reflect actual results, taking action to address problem situations, and developing rolling forecasts that help identify additional variances as the year progresses. 
c)	Comparing actual results with budgets, measuring variances, determining the causes of variances, taking action to address problem situations, and developing forecasts to determine how financial results and situations are expected to evolve. 
d)	Analyzing budget variances, identifying the causes of variances, monitoring actual results, taking action to ensure that actual results match budgets, and developing forecasts to help senior management manage results to actual budgets. 	c) 	p.624 
60. The variance analysis model is designed to identify: 
a)	Budget and actual variances. 
b)	Time and quality variances. 
c)	Budget and forecast variances. 
d)	Price and quantity variances. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.624 
61. The variance analysis model is applicable to:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Manufacturing organizations only. 
b)	Cost analysis only. 
c)	Sales and cost analysis. 
d)	Any type of organization. 
e)	For-profit organizations only. 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 
d) 	p.624 
62. The main reasons for inaccurate forecasts include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Lack of integration between budgeting and forecasting. 
b)	Not enough focus on the main variables affecting results. 
c)	Relying too much on historical data instead of predictive metrics. 
d)	Not effectively engaging business units in developing reliable forecasts. 
e)	Not providing effective forecasting tools. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	f) 	p.625 
63. Resource reallocation is: 
a)	The process of allocating resources as part of strategic and business planning. 
b)	The planning and analysis of business cases for strategies and major investments. 
c)	A method for identifying business priorities and allocating budgets to them. 
d)	The process of shifting resources from one or more organizational units to others. 
e)	A framework that helps allocate resources to strategies and investment priorities. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.625 
64. The purpose of resource reallocation is: 
a)	To set aside funds for risk financing. 
b)	To reinvest earnings instead of paying dividends. 
c)	To put financial resources to better use. 
d)	To update budgets and forecasts based on actual results. 
e)	To make decisions in order to achieve budgets and forecasts. 
f)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.625 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
65. The two biases that mostly affect resource reallocation are:   (select two) 
a)	Confidence bias - being overly optimistic about the future 
b)	Anchoring bias - fixating on the past or on initial information 
c)	Loss aversion bias - not wanting to recognize (record) losses 
d)	Hindsight bias - thinking that an outcome could have been predicted. 
e)	Fear of reprisal - avoiding to upset other people 
f)	Availability bias - making judgments based on the most recent information 	b) 
c) 	p.626 
66. The top two barriers to resource reallocations according to executives are:  (select two) 
a)	Inability to effectively analyze opportunities. 
b)	Lack of focus on organizational priorities. 
c)	Inability to make decisions on a timely basis. 
d)	Lack of sufficient resources that can actually be reallocated. 
e)	Insufficient information about business line profitability. 
f)	Fear of stakeholder reactions if decisions are unpopular. 	a) 
b) 	p.626 
67. The attributes of an effective resource reallocation framework include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Making strategies drive plans and budgets. 
b)	Removing biases and conflict from decision-making. 
c)	Rewarding managers for downsizing. 
d)	Monitoring and making reallocations habitual. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.627 
68. Fraud is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	An intentional act or omission designed to deceive others, resulting in the victim suffering a loss and/or the perpetrator achieving a gain. 
b)	A criminal act characterized by deceit, concealment, and violation of trust with the intent to steal or gain some kind of advantage. 
c)	A triangle of motive, opportunity and concealment. 
d)	A risk that applies mostly to financial institutions such as banks. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.627 
69. Fraud is typically perpetrated to:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Brag to other fraudsters (bragging rights). 
b)	Get even with someone who is unethical. 
c)	Take advantage of an opportunity that comes along. 
d)	Obtain money, property or services. 
e)	Avoid a payment or a loss of services. 
f)	Secure a personal or business advantage. 
g)	All of the above. 
h)	None of the above. 	d) 
e) 
f) 	p.627 
70. It is estimated that organizations lose _________ of their annual revenues to fraud. a) Two percent. 
b)	Five percent. 
c)	Ten percent. 
d)	Fifteen percent. 
e)	Twenty percent. 	b) 	p.627 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
71. The fraud triangle refers to the combination of these three factors: 
a)	Motive, contingency, concealment. 
b)	Ambition, probability, justification. 
c)	Motive, opportunity, rationalization. 
d)	Ambition, condition, investigation. 
e)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.627-628 
72. The factor that organizations can influence the most to prevent fraud is: a) Motive. 
b)	Rationalization. 
c)	Ambition. 
d)	Condition. 
e)	Opportunity. 
f)	Corruption. 
g)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.628 
73. The main categories of occupational fraud are: 
a)	Money laundering, bribes, kickbacks, price fixing, bid rigging, nepotism. 
b)	Overstated revenues and assets, understated expenses and liabilities. 
c)	Theft of cash, office supplies, computers, monitors, smartphones, printers. 
d)	False resumes, phony references, unexplained absences, fake expense reports. 
e)	Asset misappropriation, corruption schemes, financial statement misrepresentation. f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.628 
74. The components of a fraud risk management program include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Policies, risk assessment, process design, and internal controls. 
b)	Audits, whistleblowing, investigations and sanctions. 
c)	Motive analysis, opportunity prevention, rationalization awareness. 
d)	Security of assets, corruption prevention, financial statement analysis. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.629 
75. Fidelity insurance is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Insurance that covers losses associated with financial statement misrepresentation. 
b)	Insurance that covers losses or damages due to employee fraud. 
c)	Insurance that covers losses or damages related to all types of fraud. 
d)	Insurance that covers losses associated with conflicts of interest and corruption. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.629 
 
 
True or False Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Financial management is the processes, activities and methods for managing financial resources to achieve organizational goals, and reporting financial information. 	True 	p.586 
2. Financial management is the processes, activities and methods for managing financial investments to achieve diversification and optimal portfolio returns on financial assets. 	False 	p.586 
3. Internal financial risks include market risks, credit risks and financing risks. 	False 	p.586 
4. External financial risks include financial process risks and accounting risks. 	False 	p.586 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
5. The dual roles of financial management functions are enablers and controllers. 	True 	p.587 
6. The dual roles of financial management functions are facilitators and auditors. 	False 	p.587 
7. The three main branches of financial management are financial planning and budgeting, treasury operations, and accounting and reporting. 	True 	p.587 
8. The three main branches of financial management are treasury, controllership and audit. 	False 	p.587 
9. Market risks are the external conditions that create trade and borrowing uncertainties. 	True 	p.589 
10. Market risks are the risks of investment portfolio returns caused by stock market prices. 	False 	p.589 
11. The five basis steps for managing market risks are analyze the exposure, decide on a policy, select the right techniques, control the execution, and monitor results. 	True 	p.589 
12. The five basis steps for managing market risks are forecast the exposure, develop a model, decide how to transfer the risk, monitor the execution, and evaluate results. 	False 	p.589 
13. Rogue trading is unauthorized trading done by an employee who speculates or tries to cover risk management errors. 	True 	p.591 
14. Rogue trading is the illegal practice of trading stock on the basis of confidential information that has not yet been made public. 	False 	p.591 
15. A recession is commonly defined as a period of economic downturn where economic growth is negative for at least two consecutive quarters. 	True 	p.591 
16. A recession is commonly defined as a period of economic downturn where economic growth is negative for at least one year (four consecutive quarters). 	False 	p.591 
17. Leading market indicators include stock market levels, money supply, bond yields, consumer confidence, jobless claims, housing starts, and production activity. 	True 	p.592 
18. Leading market indicators include high inflation, short term interest rates, currency exchange fluctuations, high commodity prices, and high insurance prices. 	False 	p.592 
19. Leading market indicators help organizations develop an overall sentiment of economic prospects, and determine whether a recession may be forthcoming. 	True 	p.592 
20. Factors that make organizations particularly vulnerable to recessions include a high proportion of variable costs, and offering goods and services that are non-essential. 	False 	p.592 
21. Organizations can prepare in advance for periods of recession by monitoring leading market indicators, and developing a contingency plan.  	True 	p.592-593 
22. Organizations can prepare in advance for periods of recession by monitoring leading market indicators, and developing a business continuity plan. 	False 	p.592-593 
23. Credit risks are risks associated with collecting amounts due from customers and debtors. 	True 	p.594 
24. Credit risks are the risks of not obtaining favorable financing credit terms from banks. 	False 	p.594 
25. The process steps of a credit management program are:  collect customer information, establish credit limits and payment terms, review and update credit arrangements, and design a process for collecting bad debts. 	True 	p.596 
26. The process steps of a credit management program are:  collect banking information, determine credit limits, negotiate payment terms, review account arrangements, and contact collection agencies or take legal action for bad debts. 	False 	p.596 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
27. Customer credit should be segregated from marketing and sales because these functions are in a conflict of interest regarding customer credit. 	True 	p.595 
28. Customer credit should be segregated from marketing and sales because financial services is more knowledgeable customer account balances and collection methods. 	False 	p.595 
29. Alternative payment terms such as letters of credit should be used when new and large customers are not very well known, and especially if they are in foreign markets where it is difficult to obtain reliable references. 	True 	p.596 
30. Alternative payment terms such as letters of credit should be used when a credit management program has been established, and credit reference from bankers and suppliers are required for opening up a new customer account. 	False 	p.596 
31. The non-collection of accounts receivable can have major implications on profitability, especially when profit margins are slim. 	True 	p.594 
32. The non-collection of a $1 million accounts receivable, and the lost opportunity of making a $1 million sale, both have the same implications on profitability. 	False 	p.594 
33. A conditional sales agreement is a contract where a buyer takes possession of goods or assets, but legal ownership remains with the seller until the sale price is paid in full. 	True 	p.598 
34. A conditional sales agreement is a secured loan where inventories are pledge as security. 	False 	p.598 
35. A mortgage is a secured loan with a lien that pledges property as collateral or security. 	True 	p.598 
36. A mortgage is a contract that outlines terms under which one party agrees sell or lease property to another, in return for payments made in monthly installments. 	False 	p.598 
37. Factoring is the sale of accounts receivable at a discount to an intermediary who accepts to advance funds in exchange for the right to collect the receivables. 	True 	p.599 
38. Factoring is a model that estimates market and credit risks by factoring market conditions that may cause an entity to default on their debts and go bankrupt. 	False 	p.599 
39. Credit insurance is a  type of insurance that offers protection against the non-payment of receivables. It is mostly used by exporters for international sales. 	True 	p.599 
40. Credit insurance is a credit obtained from a retrospective rating insurance plan that adjust rates retroactively in the event that no claims are made during the policy period. 	False 	p.599 
41. Financing risk is the risk of not obtaining funds at acceptable costs, terms and conditions. 	True 	p.600 
42. Financing risk is the risk associated with collecting amounts from customers and debtors. 	False 	p.600 
43. Financing risks can be mitigated by maintaining a prudent capital structure, maintaining strong relationships with investors and debtors, and diversifying funding sources. 	True 	p.600 
44. Financing risks can be mitigated by obtaining letter of credit from customers and debtors, buying credit insurance, and buying credit default swaps. 	False 	p.600 
45. A line of credit is a revolving loan that allows to draw funds as needed up to a limit. 	True 	p.600 
46. A line of credit is a fixed amount loan that is repayable in regular (monthly) installments. 	False 	p.600 
47. A bond is a debt agreement that is typically issued as an investment security to investors. 	True 	p.600 
48. A bond is a type of insurance that covers losses or damages due to employee fraud.  	False 	p.600 
49. Financial situation risk is the inability to generate cash flow in order to meet financial obligations and maintain a sound financial structure. 	True 	p.586 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
50. Financial situation risk is the external conditions that create trade and borrowing uncertainties affecting customer demand, organizational costs and profitability. 	False 	p.586 
51. In the context of financial management, trend analysis is the measurement and display  of a tendency over time. 	True 	p.603 
52. In the context of financial management, comparative analysis is the practice of contrasting results with other organizations. 	True 	p.603 
53. Hoarding cash is a source of risk because senior executives may be tempted to make riskier investments to avoid the criticism of holding large cash balances. 	True 	p.608 
54. Hoarding cash is a source of risk because senior executives may be tempted to increases their bonuses even though they are not making good investments. 	False 	p.608 
55. Financial distress is caused by insufficient cash flow from operations, leading to working capital deficiencies, excessive debt, and the inability to meet financial obligations. 	True 	p.608 
56. Financial distress is caused by insufficient borrowing ability, making it difficult to borrow additional funds at acceptable terms and conditions to pay for day-to-day operations. 	False 	p.608 
57. Hoarding cash is a source of risk because senior executives may be tempted to make riskier investments to avoid the criticism of holding very large cash balances. 	True 	p.608 
58. Hoarding cash is a source of risk because excessive cash diminishes return on equity. 	False 	p.608 
59. Cost structure risk is reflected by the higher or lower breakeven point of an organization. 	True 	p.608-609 
60. Cost structure risk is reflected by the financial leverage of an organization. 	False 	p.608-609 
61. Operational leverage can be defined as the compounding effect of sales increases on profitability, driven by higher proportions of fixed costs relative to variable costs. 	True 	p.608-609 
62. Operational leverage can be defined as the use of debt to finance new assets, with the expectation that the return on investment will exceed the cost of borrowing. 	False 	p.608-609 
63. A contribution margin is used for cost-volume-profit analyses. 	True 	p.608-609 
64. A contribution margin is used for calculating breakeven points in dollars and units. 	True 	p.608-609 
65. Organizations with a lower proportion of fixed costs have more financial risks. 	False 	p.609 
66. Organizations with a higher proportion of variable costs have more financial risks. 	False 	p.609 
67. Capital structure risk is driven by the proportion of debt versus equity. 	True 	p.610-611 
68. Capital structure risk is reflected by the higher breakeven points of an organization. 	False 	p.610-611 
69. The factors influencing optimal debt levels are the lower cost of debt and the risk of financial distress. 	True 	p.610 
70. The factors influencing optimal debt levels are operational and financial leverage. 	False 	p.610 
71. Financial leverage can be defined as the use of debt to finance assets, with the expectation that using debt creates more value for existing shareholders than issuing new equity. 	True 	p.611 
72. Financial leverage can be defined as the compounding effect of sales increases on profitability, driven by higher proportions of fixed costs relative to variable costs. 	False 	p.611 
73. Companies in the same industry tend to have different debt-to-equity ratios. 	False 	p.612 
74. Paying dividends and buying back shares decrease financial leverage. 	False 	p.612 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
75. Financial distress is a financial situation that makes it very difficult or impossible for an organization to meet its financial obligations and remain a going concern. 	True 	p.613 
76. Financial distress is a financial situation that makes it very difficult or impossible for an organization to remain profitable while continuing to grow to meet customer demand. 	False 	p.613 
77. A bankruptcy filing for reorganization means that the organization will ask creditors to renegotiate loan arrangements and accept loan losses. 	True 	p.613 
78. A bankruptcy filing for reorganization means that the organization will ask creditors to extend payment deadlines and relax borrowing terms and conditions. 	False 	p.613 
79. Financial processes can be defined as the policies, practices and procedures for managing financial resources. 	True 	p.614 
80. Financial processes can be defined as the methods for managing an investment portfolio. 	False 	p.614 
81. The cycle of financial processes is budgeting, accounting, monitoring, forecasting and resource reallocations. 	True 	p.614 
82. The cycle of financial processes is strategy, business planning, budgeting, and forecasting. 	False 	p.614 
83. Financial process risks are the risks of ineffective policies, practices and procedures for managing financial resources, resulting in misguided resource allocations, lost or wasted resources, and unsatisfactory performance and results. 	True 	p.614 
84. Financial process risks are the risks related to the processing of financial transactions,  and the reporting of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and contingencies, resulting in losses of assets and erroneous information to stakeholders. 	False 	p.614 
85. An operational budget outlines the revenues and expenses based on the business plan. 	True 	p.615 
86. An operational budget estimates the cash flow requirements to fund operations. 	False 	p.615 
87. A capital budget outlines the resources needed for investments in assets. 	True 	p.615 
88. A capital budget estimates how much shareholder capital should be issued and when. 	False 	p.615 
89. The budgeting risk of unsubstantiated requirements occurs when there is no clear justification for the allocation base from one year to the next. 	True 	p.615 
90. The budgeting risk of unsubstantiated requirements occurs when budget targets imposed by senior executives do not appear to be substantiated. 	False 	p.615 
91. The budgeting risk of demotivating targets occurs when budget targets are imposed by senior executives without much consultation with responsible managers. 	True 	p.616 
92. The budgeting risk of demotivating targets occurs when there is no clear justification or rationale for budget amounts carried over from one year to the next. 	False 	p.616 
93. Capital budgeting risks include managerial biases in providing estimates of costs and benefits, and challenges with coming up with a valid calculation of the cost of capital. 	True 	p.617-618 
94. Capital budgeting risks include senior executives not being aware of proposed capital investments, and difficulties integrating the capital budget with the operational budget. 	False 	p.617-618 
95. Capital budgeting risks can be mitigated by assigning analyses to a separate group within financial services and getting an independent review cost of capital calculations. 	True 	p.617-618 
96. Capital budgeting risks can be mitigated by conducting post-implementation audits to verify benefits and costs, and holding managers accountable for their estimates. 	True 	p.617-618 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
97. The best method for capital budgeting is the net present value method. 	True 	p.617 
98. The best method for capital budgeting is the average accounting rate of return method. 	False 	p.617 
99. The risk-adjusted cost of capital is the cost of capital adjusted for the risk of an investment or project, when the investment or project differs from the risk profile of the organization. 	True 	p.618 
100. The risk-adjusted cost of capital is the cost of capital adjusted for differences between the risk of the organization and the risk-free rates over time. 	False 	p.618 
101. Accounting risks can be defined as the risk of not properly managing and recording financial transactions, and reporting inaccurate financial information, resulting in misleading information, ineffective financial management and lost income. 	True 	p.618 
102. Accounting risks can be defined as the risks that relate to financial markets, and the risks associated with financial management activities and transactions. 	False 	p.618 
103. The essential characteristics of useful financial accounting information are reliability, timeliness, comparability, verifiability and relevance. 	True 	p.619 
104. The essential characteristics of useful financial accounting information are validity, accuracy, reliability, verifiability and auditability. 	False 	p.619 
105. An accounting process can be defined as the methods, procedures and accounts used  to capture, record and manage routine financial transactions taking place within a recurring cycle of activities. 	True 	p.621 
106. In an accounting process, the custody of assets, the shipping and receiving, the recording of transactions, the cash receipts and disbursements, and the reconciliation of accounts are all tasks that should be segregated from one another. 	True 	p.622 
107. In an accounting process, the recording of accounts receivable, the recording of accounts payable, and the recording of assets should be segregated from each other. 	False 	p.622 
108. In an accounting process, the custody of assets does not have to be segregated from the recording of transactions provided that accounts are reconciled by a different person. 	False 	p.622 
109. The variance analysis model is designed to identify price and quantity variances. 	True 	p.624 
110. The variance analysis model is designed to identify budget and forecast variances. 	False 	p.624 
111. The variance analysis model applies to sales, costs and any type of organization. 	True 	p.624 
112. The variance analysis model applies to for-profit manufacturing organizations only. 	False 	p.624 
113. The main reasons for inaccurate forecasts include lack of focus on the main variables affecting results, and an overreliance on historical data instead of predictive metrics. 	True 	p.625 
114. The main reasons for inaccurate forecasts include budgeting errors, unreliable information systems, and unanticipated changes in external conditions. 	False 	p.625 
115. Resource reallocation is the process of shifting resources from one or more organizational units to others in order to allocate more resources to business priorities. 	True 	p.625 
116. Resource reallocation is the process of downsizing or downscoping business lines in order to achieve a reorganization, retrenchment or transformation. 	False 	p.625 
117. The two biases that mostly affect resource reallocations are the anchoring bias (fixating on the past) and the loss aversion bias (avoiding to report losses from asset write-offs). 	True 	p.626 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
118. The two biases that mostly affect resource reallocations are the confidence bias (being overly optimistic) and the availability bias (judging based on recent information). 	False 	p.626 
119. The top two barriers to resource reallocations according to executives are the inability to effectively analyze opportunities, and lack of focus on organizational priorities. 	True 	p.626 
120. The top two barriers to resource reallocations according to executives are the inability to make decisions on a timely basis, and the lack of resources that can be reallocated. 	False 	p.626 
121. The attributes of an effective resource reallocation framework include making strategies drive plans and budgets, rewarding managers for downsizing, and creating an organizational culture where reallocations are habitual and accepted. 	True 	p.627 
122. In principle, organizations should analyze and adjust their allocation of resources across business lines similarly to investment funds managing securities in a portfolio. 	True 	p.625 
123. Fraud is an intentional act or omission designed to deceive others, resulting in the victim suffering a loss and/or the perpetrator achieving a gain. 	True 	p.627 
124. Fraud is a criminal act characterized by deceit, concealment, and violation of trust with the intent to steal or gain some kind of advantage. 	True 	p.627 
125. Fraud is typically perpetrated to: 1) obtain money, property or services; 2) avoid a payment or a loss of service; or 3) secure a personal or business advantage. 	True 	p.627 
126. Fraud is typically perpetrated to: 1) obtain a favor or advantage; 2) avoid a payment or an obligation; or 3) secure a preferential treatment for family and friends. 	False 	p.627 
127. It is estimated that organizations lose five percent of their annual revenues to fraud. 	True 	p.627 
128. It is estimated that organizations lose twenty percent of their annual revenues to fraud. 	False 	p.627 
129. The fraud triangle refers to motive, opportunity and rationalization. 	True 	p.627 
130. The fraud triangle refers to ambition, condition and concealment. 	False 	p.627 
131. Fidelity insurance covers losses or damages due to employee fraud. 	True 	p.629 
132. Fidelity insurance covers all types of frauds. 	False 	p.629 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 13  
Information Management and Technology Risks 
 
 
Review Questions 
 
1. Information technology systems 
 
a)	What are information technology systems?   (p.648) 
Information technology systems are systems that capture, process, archive and report information using computer-based technologies. Information technology systems can be divided in two categories, namely operational support systems and management support systems. 
 
b)	Outline the objectives and risks of information versus technology.   (p.649) 
 	Information 	Technology 
Objectives 		Valid, complete, accurate and timely 
	Supports management decisions 
	Meets all reporting requirements 
	Protected for privacy and confidentiality 
	Cost-effective to manage and secure 		Robust, stable, consistent and secure 
	Meets strategic and operational needs 
	Provides reliable and timely information 
	Supports the continuity of operations 
	Cost-effective to operate and maintain 
Risks 		Unreliable, unavailable or untimely 
	Not useful for decisions and reporting 
	Unauthorized access and use 
	Loss, corruption, destruction or theft 
	Costly to manage and secure 		Interruption, downtime or instability 
	Inadequate or insufficient functionalities 
	Failures causing loss of information 
	Damage, destruction, theft or vandalism 
	Costly to operate and maintain 
 	 
 
c)	Illustrate the main activities for managing information technology systems.   (p.651) 
 
 
d)	Briefly explain three sources of risk that prevent IT functions from delivering strategic and value added services to organizational functions and units.   (p.650-651) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Cultural and structural issues - belief that IT functions are not capable of being strategic 
•	Misinformed decisions and resource allocations - decision-makers that lack IT knowledge 
•	Lack of clear priorities - absence of a clear IT vision and long term strategy 
•	Misalignment of services - IT services not aligned with business function needs 
•	Talent shortages - constant challenges for staffing IT functions, difficult to recruit 
•	Language barriers  - IT professionals and business managers have different backgrounds 
 
e)	Outline the categories of controls associated with general computer controls and application controls, and give a control example for each type of category.   (p.653) 
General computer controls: 
•	Governance - digital vision and strategy approved by the board 
•	Management and maintenance - committee that provides direction and support for IT 
•	Development and integration - planning and approval of system projects • Information technology security - network access controls including password 
Application controls: 
•	Input controls - electronic data interchange validation 
•	Processing controls - data processing routines and schedules 
•	Output controls - data processing confirmation reports 
 
f)	Explain how ineffective governance affects information technology management.   (p.653) According to the Institute of Internal Auditors “a number of organizations have limited information technology expertise at the board of directors.” Without such expertise, it is not possible for boards to exercise effective governance on information technology strategies, risks, investments, projects, etc. Effective governance is needed to make senior executives accountable. 
 
g)	Outline the main causes of system development failures and how to mitigate them.   (p.654 Many information technology system projects fail (…) . The causes of failure most often reported are lack of senior executive support, lack of management accountability for results, employee resistance to change, resource constraints, excessive complexity, scope increases, technical incompetence, and lack of end user participation in the development process. A sound management framework and system development methodology can address all of these issues. 
 
2. Information management 
 
a)	Define and explain information management.   (p.655) 
Information management is the combination of activities for capturing, accumulating, processing, organizing, analyzing, disseminating, archiving and protecting data and information. The main purposes of information management are to support operations, develop knowledge, and improve decisions. A simple example of information management is the filing of electronic documents into folders and sub-folders. A more complex example is the creation of a database management system that provides a single repository for management support systems. 
 
b)	Outline the benefits of information management.   (p.655) 
The benefits of information and knowledge management include reduced uncertainties, greater operational efficiency, improved strategies and decisions, more effective marketing, employee empowerment, flatter management structures, better coordination among organizational groups, and the ability to effectively train new employees and transfer knowledge to them. 
 
c)	Explain the following risks in the context of information management initiatives:   (p.656-657) 
-	Absent leadership - executives that do not understand the benefits of information management fail to support initiatives and conditions for them to succeed. 
-	Lack of vision and methods - not having a clear understanding information needs, how to manage data, and how to proceed to gain valuable insights and knowledge from data 
-	Misguided approach - managing information management initiatives the same way as IT system implementations (information management initiatives require a different approach) 
-	Information overload - too much information is not much better than too little, need to process relevant data, and report useful information clearly and concisely. 
d)	Briefly describe the right approach that should be taken for implementing information and knowledge management solutions.   (p.657) 
•	Define information needs - ask questions such as: What information and knowledge are critical to organizational success? What information do we need to make valid decisions? 
•	Concentrate on how business problems need to be solved before looking at IT solutions 
•	Determine if the approach should be to codify or personalize knowledge 
-	Codify - person-to-document approach 
-	Personalize - person-to-person approach 
 
e)	Describe the attributes of information quality.   (p.659) 
•	Accessible - easy to access, user know how to find it 
•	Correct - accurate and complete 
•	Current - gathered and updated at the right frequency  
•	Protected - from unauthorized access and use 
•	Retained - stored for continued access 
•	Sufficient - at the right level of detail to meet requirements 
•	Timely - available on a timely basis to those who need it 
•	Valid - obtained from relevant and authorized sources 
•	Verifiable - supported by evidence that can be traced to the source 
 
3. Information system planning 
 
a)	What is information system planning?   (p.659) 
Information system planning is the activities carried out for making decisions about information technology solutions, and for managing the implementation of those solutions. It is done holistically at the enterprise level for all systems, and for each individual information technology initiative. The purposes of information system planning are to ensure that the right information system priorities are addressed, and that solutions are implemented successfully. 
 
b)	What are the causes of information technology project failures?   (p.659-660) 
A survey of chief information technology officers conducted in 2017 by the Harvey Nash Group and KPMG identifies weak project ownership, unrealistic expectations, and unclear objectives as the main reasons for project failures. Additional reasons reported include lack of talent, poor governance, overly complex projects, insufficient budget, and poor methodologies.  These issues can be addressed with proper information system planning. 
 
c)	List five factors that make information technology projects successful.   (p.661-662) 
• 
• • • • 
• 	Long term vision 
Management of priorities 
Senior executive commitment 
Project management rigor 
Project objectives, requirements and scope Project team qualifications 	• 
• 
• • 
• 	System developer or vendor selection 
End user involvement 
Change management 
Risk management 
Complexity reduction 
 
d)	Explain the two basic approaches for involving end users during projects.   (p.661) 
Indirect
Participation
•	• • •
Direct
Participation
•	• ••	End users are not part of the project team
End users provide input and validation
System developers do the work
This approach expedites the work
End users are part of the project team
End users are trained to do the work
System developers facilitate the work
This approach creates better ownership	The goal is to expedite the work by involving end users only as needed, and letting developers do the work.
The goal is to transfer knowledge by involving end users as much as possible throughout the project.
4. Information system development 
 
a)	What is information system development?   (p.663) 
Information system development is the activities required to plan and carry out a specific information technology initiative. The purpose is to ensure that an information technology initiative is adequately planned and carried out, in accordance with project sponsor and stakeholder expectations, and in agreement with enterprise-level directions for systems. 
 
b)	Outline how project management phases overlap system development phases.   (p.663) 
Project
Management
Phases
System 
Development 
Phases
Project Initiation
	and	Project 
	Project Planning	Project Execution	Closedown
Post-
Planning	Analysis	Design	Implementation	Implementation Review
 
5. System development planning 
 
a)	What is system development planning?   (p.663) 
System development planning is the activities required to plan the execution phases of system development, namely the analysis, design and implementation phases.  
 
b)	How does system development planning differ from information system planning? (p.659, p.663) 
•	System development planning - planning for a specific IT initiative 
•	Information system planning - holistic planning for all IT initiative at the enterprise level. 
 
c)	Explain why a project plan should never be a static document.   (p.664) 
A project plan is a preliminary judgment of the activities required to undertake and execute each phase of a project. The project plan should be reexamined by the project manager and project sponsor at the end of each system development phase to ensure that it continues to be valid.  The plan should be resubmitted to the information systems management committee at the enterprise level whenever there are significant changes to project objectives, scope or resources.  
 
6. System development analysis 
 
a)	What is system development analysis?   (p.664-665) 
System development analysis is a structured examination of system requirements from a strategic, operational, technical and financial perspective.  
•	Strategic and operational perspectives - needs analysis, requirements definition 
•	Technical perspective - feasibility analysis, feasibility study 
•	Financial perspective - business case analysis, business case 
 
b)	Describe what is a needs analysis and how it is carried out.   (p.665) 
Involves identifying, analyzing and documenting information and process needs. The analysis must take into account how the employees currently use the system, and how it needs to evolve for the future. A multi-pronged approach should be taken to ensure that all important needs are identified. It is recommended to conduct individual and group interviews, observe employees, review policies and procedures, and carefully analyze all types of system outputs and results. 
 
c)	Illustrate and explain the conceptual approach for requirements definition.   (p.665) 
 
 
d)	Explain the risk of business process reengineering in the context of system development,  and the approach for managing this risk effectively.   (p.666) 
Activities that are not critical, that can be changed, and that add little value should be redesigned or eliminated. However, organizations must be very careful about scope creep, namely trying to accomplish too much within a given project. Reengineering efforts are often costly, and they can add a lot of complexity. It is advisable to divide reengineering efforts into small manageable pieces when those efforts are combined with information system development. 
 
e)	Outline the important criteria to consider when selecting a developer of software.   (p.667) The most important criteria to consider when selecting a developer of software are:  
1)	Software developer reputation and experience with similar projects and clients. 
2)	Qualifications and experience of the personnel assigned to the project. 
3)	System development approach and methodology. 
4)	Approach for training employees and transferring knowledge to them. 
5)	Post-implementation support capability. 
6)	Price of the services. 
 
f)	Explain the benefits and concerns associated with cloud-computing solutions.   (p.667) 
•	Benefits - ease of access, scalability of solutions, lower costs, better analytics, refocus of employees on strategic and value added services as opposed to basic system operations 
•	Concerns - reliance on the Internet, unclear information security arrangements, unclear responsibilities in the event of data breaches, unclear location of servers and information, privacy legislation constraints regarding the location of databases and computers. 
 
g)	Explain the risks associated with outsourcing information technology services.   (p.668) Outsourcing risks include loss of control, inflexible contracts, unfulfilled promises, and poor services.  It can be very difficult to reinstate information technology services after they are outsourced. The same rule that applies to developing custom solutions also applies to outsourcing. Organizations should generally not outsource the development and maintenance of systems that are critical to their success and competitiveness. 
 
7. System design 
 
a)	What is system design?   (p.668) 
System design is the conceptualization of a system solution that meets requirements. It can be described as a blueprint, namely a set of drawings and explanations that illustrate and outline specifications. It may also include a prototype, namely a working sample of the system. 
 
 
 
 
b)	Illustrate the components of logical and physical design using a diagram.   (p.669) 
 
 
c)	What is input design and why is it important?   (p.670) 
Input design is the conceptualization of effective data entry methods, and the techniques for preventing, detecting and correcting data entry errors. The purpose is to facilitate data entry, and prevent inaccurate, incomplete or invalid data from being captured, processed and stored. (…) The old adage of garbage in, garbage out attests to the importance and risks of input design. 
 
d)	Explain the risks associated with the use of spreadsheets.   (p.671) 
Large organizations can have hundreds of spreadsheets that supplement their information systems. End users typically develop those spreadsheets and download (export) system data to them. The spreadsheets often escape any kind of logical design scrutiny, which is a significant source of risk. A survey reveals that more than ninety percent of spreadsheets contain errors.  Spreadsheet errors affect analyses, decision making and reporting. They can result in significant losses, reporting errors, and compliance issues if undetected. (…) Stories abound of companies that misreported financial information due to spreadsheet errors and had to restate their earnings. Such events tarnish corporate reputation and can lead to fines and lawsuits. 
 
8. System implementation 
 
a)	What is system implementation?   (p.672) 
System implementation is the creation and operationalization of an information system in accordance with design specifications. The main activities of system implementation are coding, testing, installation, documentation, training and support. 
 
b)	Explain the main risk of system implementation and the causes of failure.   (p.672) 
The main risk of system implementation is the inability to deliver a solution that works properly, and that users understand and accept. Many well-designed information systems fail during implementation because of defective coding, inadequate testing, faulty installation, or insufficient training and support. 
 
c)	Explain why many implementations fail.   (p.672) 
Many well-designed information systems fail during implementation because of defective coding, inadequate testing, faulty installation, or insufficient training and support. 
 
d)	What are the two main branches of testing?   (p.673) 
•	Developer testing 
•	User acceptance testing 
 
 
e)	Outline two examples for each branch of testing.   (p.673) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Developer testing - Developers testing includes code inspections, code walkthroughs, desk checking, unit testing, integration testing, and system testing. 
•	User acceptance testing - User acceptance testing includes application testing, system performance testing, stress testing and recovery testing. 
 
f)	Describe the four types of installation approaches.   (p.674) 
•	Direct installation - new system installed, old system decommissioned at the same time 
•	Parallel installation - new system installed, old system continues to operate alongside,  until such time as the new system is determined to operate reliably. 
•	Phased location - new system installed in one location, other locations continue to use the old system, new system installed to additional locations after first installation is successful. 
•	Phased functionality - new system is installed one module (one functionality) at a time.  
 
g)	Explain how to use a prudent approach for installation.   (p.674) 
It is prudent to use a phased approach for installation whenever possible. If a phased approach ]location or functionality] is not possible, organizations can mitigate installation risks through extensive testing prior to installation, and by operating the old information system in parallel for a short period. The choice of installation approaches is mainly driven by system complexity, available resources and risk tolerance. 
 
h)	What is a post-implementation review?   (p.676) 
A post-implementation review is a study to analyze implementation results, determine if the objectives of the system initiative are achieved, take corrective actions where necessary, and identify and document lessons learned for future reference. In the context of project management, a post-implementation review also includes analyzing project performance in relation to the quality of deliverables, completion timelines, and actual costs versus budget. 
 
i)	Outline three considerations and review criteria for post-implementation.   (p.676) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Objectives - The objectives of the system initiative are achieved satisfactorily. 
•	Costs - The costs incurred are consistent with the initial or revised budget. 
•	Timeline - The system was implemented in accordance with planned timelines. 
•	Quality - The system is a quality solution that meets organizational requirements. 
•	Reliability - The system processes data accurately and produces reliable information. 
•	Issue resolution - Project issues were identified, escalated and resolved on a timely basis. 
•	User satisfaction - Users are satisfied with the system and the approach for managing change. 
•	Documentation - Documentation is comprehensive and meets user and maintenance needs. 
•	User training - User training was effective and delivered on a timely basis. 
•	User support - User support is comprehensive and meets organizational needs. 
•	Communications - Key stakeholders were properly informed during the project. 
 
9. System integration 
 
a)	Explain how organizations often stray away from system integration.   (p.677) Over time, organizations accumulate a patchwork of information systems across their management functions and business units. The accumulation results from creating new software applications every time new processes are implemented, or whenever additional functionalities or information are requested. The existence of multiple systems creates numerous problems. 
 
 
b)	Explain how ERP systems provide a good solution for system integration.   (p.677) An ERP system is a software solution that integrates multiple applications and functionalities using shared databases and a common database management system. ERP systems allow organizations to eliminate disparate information systems, automate business processes, share data across management functions and business units, and access information in real time.  ERP systems are modular. Organizations can use one or more modules as they wish. 
 
c)	What is the most common reason for cancelling ERP implementation projects?   (p.677-678) Although they offer an attractive solution for system integration, ERP software solutions are rather complex, expensive and difficult to implement. (…) The most common reason for cancelling ERP implementation projects is discovering that the software solution does not support important business processes. 
 
d)	What are the benefits and challenges of ERP systems?   (p.678) 
Benefits 	Challenges 
	End to end process integration across functions 
	Common databases that share information 
	Breaking down silos across functions 
	More reliable information at the enterprise level 
	Support available from major software vendors 
	Cheaper to operate and maintain once installed 
	Facilitates the management of computer security 		Complex to understand and properly configure 
	Typically requires process transformation 
	Often requires extensive customization 
	Expensive and time consuming to implement 
	Projects have a relatively high rate of failure 
	Requires extensive user training 
	Resistance to change may be significant 
 
 	 
10. Information system maintenance 
 
a)	What is system maintenance?   (p.678) 
System maintenance is the processing of modifications, updates and upgrades to  information systems. It includes software and hardware maintenance(…) The purposes are to respond to evolving needs, correct deficiencies, or take advantage of opportunities. 
•	Software maintenance - may involve adding or modifying functionalities, fixing problems or security issues, or upgrading software to a new version.  
•	Hardware maintenance - may involve troubleshooting or replacing equipment such as modems, routers, wires, connectors computers and servers.  
 
b)	Why is system maintenance an indicator of system development performance?   (p.678-679) The more that system development did not achieve good results, the more system maintenance is needed to correct problems and address shortcomings. (…) If the frequency, level of effort and cost of maintenance do not gradually diminish after implementation, it is usually a sign that system development was deficient. 
 
c)	Describe the four categories of system maintenance.   (p.679) 
Category 	Description 
Corrective 
Maintenance 	Maintenance to address software or hardware design or performance issues, missing functionality, data entry or processing errors, insufficient or inadequate reports, etc.  
Adaptive 
Maintenance 	Maintenance to evolve system functionality in response to changing needs, operating environment, competitive pressures, opportunities to automate processes, etc. 
Perfective 
Maintenance 	Maintenance to enhance or improve user experience or system performance, to add new functionality to improve productivity, to create additional reports to support decisions, etc. 
Preventive 
Maintenance 	Maintenance to prevent or reduce the likelihood of system failure, to limit or reduce the  risk of security breaches, to apply software updates, to upgrade hardware etc. 
 	 
d)	Explain how change requests are a risk and how to mitigate this risk.   (p.679-680) 
•	Risk - System maintenance requires a formal management process to analyze the merits and implications of change requests, prevent unauthorized changes, and protect system integrity. 
•	Mitigation - change requests documented and approved by business unit manager; reviewed by IT services for consistency with plans and feasibility; submitted to management committee if inconsistent with plans; once approved: prioritized and logged in case management system and implemented at the appropriate time based on other maintenance priorities. 
 
e)	Explain how software version control is a risk and how to mitigate this risk.   (p.680) 
•	Risk - not maintaining adequate software version control is a source of risk because changes to software may cause information systems to malfunction or even crash. 
•	Mitigation - take copies of software and data, apply changes, updates or upgrades to the copies in a secure area, apply and test the changes; request users to sign-off on the results; make a back-up of existing systems and then apply the changes to the system; make sure that it is possible to revert back to the back-up in case issues surface; dedicated person within IT services is responsible to document and maintain software version control at all times. 
 
11. Information technology security 
 
a)	Define information technology security.   (p.681) 
Information technology (IT) security is the protection of information technology systems for preserving their integrity and availability, and for safeguarding the confidentiality of information. IT security covers all hardware, software, data and communication components. 
 
b)	Outline the three types of information technology security issues across the four components of information technology systems using a table format.   (p.681) 
Component 	Integrity 	Availability 	Confidentiality 
Hardware 	Hardware components  are damaged or stolen. 	Hardware components cause service interruptions. 	Hardware containing sensitive data is stolen. 
Software 	Software is modified without authorization. 	Software crashes or does not perform as intended. 	Software is not protected  for unauthorized access. 
Data 	Data is altered or deleted without authorization. 	Data cannot be accessed or is missing / unreliable. 	Data is accessed without authorization or stolen. 
Communications 	Messages are deleted, falsified or duplicated. 	Communications systems are unreliable or unavailable. 	Messages are intercepted and read. 
 	 
c)	What are the consequences of information technology security issues?   (p.681) 
The consequences of IT security issues can be devastating. They include loss or theft of data and information, business interruptions, brand and reputation damage, lost stakeholder confidence, regulatory fines and potential lawsuits. Direct costs include time spent detecting threats, shutting down information systems, investigating the nature and scope of the damages, implementing safe measures, restoring and testing information systems, alerting stakeholders, reporting data breaches to regulatory authorities, and responding to lawsuits. 
 
d)	Outline three types of cyberattacks and three types of malware.   (p.683) Cyberattacks - three common types are: 
•	Hacking - unauthorized access to a system 
•	Spoofing - identifying as an employee of the organization • Denial of service - overwhelming to cause an interruption Malwares - three common types are: 
•	Virus - program that attaches itself to other programs 
•	Ransomware - program that locks other programs for a ransom 
•	Spyware - program that captures information and sends it out 
e)	Briefly explain the five components of an IT security framework?   (p.684) 
•	Security objectives - consider organizational context, inherent risks, stakeholder expectations, 
•	Security policies - outline objectives, scope, what needs to be done, who is responsible 
•	Roles, responsibilities, accountabilities - must be clear and outline in policies and procedures 
•	Risk assessment - identify inherent risks, assess residual risks, determine priorities 
•	Action plan - detail what will be done, who is responsible for decisions, actions and support, what are the implementation timelines for each action, how progress will be monitored, etc. 
 
f)	What physical security measures mitigate the threat of human behavior?   (p.685) 
•	Access control mechanisms - such as locked doors and limited entry points. 
•	Authentication mechanisms - such as access cards and biometric authentication. 
•	Surveillance mechanisms - such as security guards and video surveillance. 
 
g)	Explain the difference between authorization and authentication.   (p.687) • Authorization - methods to restrict user access to systems and functionalities. 
•	Authentication - methods to verify (validate) the identity of individuals. 
 
h)	Explain the difference between access logs and intrusion detection.   (p.687) 
•	Access logs - track access to systems using access logs built-in each systems. 
•	Intrusion detection - monitoring to detect unauthorized access or suspicious activity. 
 
i)	Explain what should be covered in employee agreements for IT security.   (p.687) 
•	Acceptable use of computers, devices, the Internet, emails and social media.  
•	Rights of employers to monitor employee use consistent with applicable laws and regulations.  
•	Sanctions for noncompliance to employee agreements. 
 
12. Information privacy obligations 
 
a)	What does information privacy mean?   (p.688) 
A very important regulatory obligation closely related to information technology security is the protection of private information collected from individuals such as employees and customers. This obligation is commonly known as information privacy. 
 
b)	What are the six main principles of information privacy?   (p.689) 
•	Data collection – only for a legitimate purpose, only what is required to achieve the purpose, and storage only for as long as the data is needed for the purpose.  
•	Accountability – a data controller designated and able to demonstrate compliance with information privacy obligations (data collection records, actual use, security training). 
•	Data security – information appropriately secured, access controlled through authentication and access rights. Encryption for protection against unauthorized access. 
•	Data breach notification – notify individuals within seventy-two hours (general rule) but the timelines are generally not as strict if the information is encrypted. 
•	Consent – must be obtained, and must be informed, given freely and unambiguous; consent agreement must be in clear and plain language; documentary evidence of consent must exist. 
•	Consenter rights – right to be informed about usage;  right to access and rectify or delete the information; right to object (e.g. not provide the information or refuse that is be shared). 
 
c)	Outline three actions for ensuring the privacy and confidentiality of information.   (p.689) Students may choose from the following: 
•	Identifying and classifying all information that must be protected 
•	Restricting physical and digital access to sensitive and personal information 
•	Ensuring that all sensitive and personal information is encrypted 
•	Developing policies for the collection and use of personal information 
•	Training employees on how to use and secure information 
•	Monitoring access to information and compliance to privacy policies 
•	Destroying or deleting sensitive or personal information no longer required 
 
13. Disaster recovery 
 
a)	What is a disaster recovery plan?   (p.690) 
A disaster recovery plan is a plan that minimize the effects of information technology system interruptions and quickly restore systems to a normal state of operation. A good disaster recovery plan enables a rapid recovery, regardless of the source or cause of interruption. 
 
b)	Explain recovery time objective and recovery point objective.   (p.690) 
•	Recovery time objective - how long each information technology system can remain unavailable without causing major operational issues. 
•	Recovery point objective - the point in time after which data obsolescence [the amount of missing data] becomes a problem for operational recovery. 
 
c)	Briefly describe the three procedures and arrangements for disaster recovery.   (p.690-691) 
•	Software and data back-ups - back-up frequency needs to accommodate recovery time objective; at least one back-up stored offsite; test system recovery using back-ups on a regular basis (never assume that back-ups are valid without testing restoration procedures). 
•	Alternate data processing sites - design network infrastructure to have more than one site for servers and computers; or contract with a service provider for using computing services in the event of a disaster; ensure that recovery time and recovery point objectives are met. 
•	Alternate working arrangements - arrangements for employees to work from another office location, or from home; or arrangements with a service provider that can provide office and computing facilities on a temporary basis (hot site or cold site). 
 
d)	Explain how disaster recovery planning differs from business continuity planning.   (p.691) 
•	Business continuity planning - focuses on maintaining the continuity of operations in general. 
•	Disaster recovery planning - focuses only on the continuity of information technology systems; disaster recovery plan may be a distinct plan, or a subset of the business continuity plan. 
 
 
Other Short Answer Questions 
 
1.	Explain the difference between operational support systems and management support systems. (p.648) 
•	Operational support system - a system that captures and processes transactional data. Examples include a sales ordering system, an inventory tracking system, a payroll processing system, and a production control system that monitors the flow of a production line.  
•	Management support system - a system that provides information for decision making and reporting. Examples include a management information system (MIS) that reports sales information by region, a decision support system (DSS) that helps determine product prices, and an executive information system (EIS) that reports risk and performance indicators. 
 
2.	Explain the IT function dual roles of strategic leadership and operational support.   (p.650) Which role is becoming more important and why? 
•	Strategic leadership - effective technology solutions that enable organizational strategies. 
•	Operational support - systems operate as intended and meet user requirements. 
Given that many organizations consider implementing advanced technological solutions involving artificial intelligence, analytics and robotics to develop a competitive advantage, there is a growing need for strategic leadership and innovation. Concurrently, given that many organizations migrate to Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems and cloud-based software applications, there is a diminishing need for maintaining applications and network infrastructure within organizations. 
 
3.	Explain the language barrier between IT professionals and business unit managers.   (p.651) What is a good approach for overcoming the language barrier? 
IT professionals and business unit managers have very different backgrounds and often struggle to understand each other. IT professionals use technical terms that most people do not know. 
Conversely, business unit managers also use expressions or terms that are unique. Language barriers cause frustrations. They are also a significant source of risk because issues may not be properly understood. A good approach for bridging language barriers is to create business analyst positions staffed by information technology professionals with a business school education. Business analysts should be assigned to specific business units. They may report directly to business unit managers. 
 
4.	Why is it important to obtain independent reviews and audits of information technology controls? Who are good providers for these reviews and audits?   (p.653) 
Because of the ongoing evolution of information technology systems and risks, it is important for management to obtain independent reviews and audits of information technology controls regularly. 
•	Suppliers of IT components - advice for design and implementation of controls 
•	External consultants - expert advice and assistance for conducting reviews or audits 
•	Internal audit - periodic and continuous audits of information technology controls 
 
5.	Explain why large organizations often have a patchwork of systems and the implications.   (p.654) How can this problem be corrected? 
Organizations have a tendency to create new applications whenever they need additional functionalities or information. Over time, this situation leads to a patchwork of systems. It also creates multiple islands of data and information that are not integrated and not necessarily properly updated. Very large organizations can have hundreds if not thousands of separate applications, making it very difficult to keep track of who uses which applications and for what purpose. The proliferation of systems creates significant information and security risks. It also increases operational costs. Many organizations implement Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems to correct this problem. 
 
6.	Explain why system maintenance costs are a huge challenge for many organizations.   (p.654) Information technology systems maintenance is a significant expense for many organizations. It can represent as much as eighty percent of the total budget allocated to information technology.  Huge maintenance costs are attributable to old systems, customized systems, and systems developed inhouse, all of which cannot be easily modified or upgraded. (…) When organizations have to spend too much on information system maintenance, their ability to migrate to less costly solutions is severely diminished, especially if they operate on thin profit margins. 
 
7.	Explain the difference between information management and knowledge management   (p.655) 
•	Information management - the combination of activities for capturing, accumulating, processing, organizing, analyzing, disseminating, archiving and protecting data and information. 
•	Knowledge management - the activities aimed at converting data and information into valuable insights, making those insights available to those who need them, and ensuring that knowledge is protected and transmitted to new employees over time. 
 
8.	Explain the consequences of not having a framework for information management.  (p.655, p.659) 
•	Issues encountered - many organizations have a disorderly approach to managing information, which negatively affects their productivity, performance and results. 
•	Benefits not realized - greater uncertainties, less operational efficiency, misguided strategies and decisions, less effective marketing, less empowerment, more management structures, less coordination, less ability to effectively train new employees and transfer knowledge to them. 
9.	What are the main activities of information system planning?   (p.659) 
The main activities of information system planning are to define requirements, identify priorities, analyze alternatives, determine solutions, and manage their implementation. The alternatives include developing systems internally, hiring contractors for system development, buying packaged solutions, and outsourcing system development and maintenance to information technology service providers. 
 
10.	Why is information system planning critical to organizational success?   (p.659) Information system planning is critical given the importance of information technology  to organizational success, and the high rate of information technology project failures. A study conducted by The Standish Group, an international information technology research and advisory firm, reveals that the success rate of large information technology projects is less than twenty-percent. More than fifty-percent of projects experience challenges, and more than thirty percent are failures. 
 
11.	Explain why change management is a source of risk and a critical success factor to take into account as part of information system planning.   (p.661) 
Information technology initiatives often have major implications on employee roles and responsibilities. Some employees may have to upgrade their skills, accept new ways of doing things, or transition to a new job. These situations create anxiety. Employees negatively affected resist change. They may withdraw, withhold information, or even try to sabotage initiatives. A change management strategy is needed to positively engage employees, and help them transition to new and better roles. Most employees can be retrained to a new job, and it is important to provide counselling, encouragement and support for doing so. 
 
12.	How should risk management be planned as part of information system projects?   (p.662) 
The main drivers of risk are project size and complexity. Every success factor outlined in this section [pages 660-662] is also a significant source of risk if not appropriately managed. Unfortunately, risk management is often an afterthought in project management.  Every large or complex project should have a risk profile and risk management action plan. Developing risk profiles should be assigned to risk management professionals, not to managers or developers not familiar with risk management. 
 
13.	Explain how project management supports information technology initiatives.   (p.663) Project management is a framework and methodology that supports information technology initiatives, as well as any other organizational initiative such implementing a strategy, building a production plant, undertaking a marketing campaign, etc. As such, project management frameworks and methodologies are generic. The purpose of project management is to ensure that a project achieves its intended results, namely that expectations are met, and that the project is completed on time and within budget. Project management rigor is a key success factor of individual IT initiatives. 
 
14.	Explain the difference between a project charter and a project plan.   (p.664) 
•	Project charter - describes the project objectives, scope, approach and management structure. 
•	Project plan - outlines project activities, milestones and timelines. 
 
15.	Why should individual project charters and plans be approved at the enterprise-level?   (p.664) The charter and plan should also be reviewed and approved by the information systems management committee or steering committee responsible for managing information systems at the enterprise level. This approval ensures that the charter and plan are reviewed independently, and that they are consistent with enterprise-level directions for information systems and project management. 
 
16.	Outline the important criteria to consider when selecting a vendor of software.   (p.667) The most important criteria to consider when selecting a vendor of software are: 
1)	Software meets organizational requirements. 
2)	Vendor has a good reputation. 
3)	Vendor is capable of providing adequate user support and software maintenance. 4)  Software, support and maintenance are reasonably priced. 
17.	Explain the growing trend to use cloud-based service for information technology.   (p.666) There is a growing trend to migrate software solutions to external service providers for greater flexibility and cost reduction. In particular, cloud-based services and applications are on the rise. 
 
18.	What is the main concern with cloud-based services for information technology?   (p.668) The main concern with cloud-based services relates to information technology security.  It can be rather difficult to obtain clarity from cloud-based service providers on their security arrangements, and getting assurance that these arrangements are properly applied. 
 
19.	When should organizations develop custom software solutions?   (p.666) 
As a general rule, organizations should develop custom software solutions only if adequate solutions are not available from software vendors, and are necessary for achieving or maintaining a competitive advantage. Otherwise, it is normally preferrable to use software vendor solutions because they are generally less expensive and less difficult to maintain and upgrade. 
 
20.	What is user-system interface design and why is it important?   (p.670) 
•	Description - User-system interface design determines the most appropriate and effective methods of interaction between users and the system. These methods include computer screens, pointing devices, menus, toolbars, graphic icons, dialog boxes, input fields, search bars, help tools, etc.  
•	Importance - Nobody likes applications that are not user-friendly, not intuitive, awkward looking, difficult to navigate, etc. Poor user-system interface design causes frustrations, errors, underused functionalities and manual workarounds. These situations result in low productivity, excessive operating costs and unreliable information. 
 
21.	How would you describe the main challenges (risks) of each of the following logical design component? (p.669-671) 
Logical Design Component 	Main Challenges / Risks 
Business process design 	• Processes not sufficiently automated or process workarounds to fit the system, resulting in lower productivity and higher operating costs. 
User-system interface design 	• Applications that are not user-friendly, not intuitive, awkward looking, resulting in low productivity, higher costs and unreliable information. 
Input design 	• Ineffective methods and techniques for preventing, detecting and correcting data entry errors resulting in unreliable information. 
Data processing design 	• Modules and programs that do not meet requirements, or are not properly integrated, resulting in higher costs and unreliable information. 
Output design 	• Not properly anticipating management information needs resulting in workarounds, higher costs, and misguided actions or decisions. 
Data storage design 	• Not properly structuring databases, resulting in lower system performance, lower productivity, higher operating costs, etc. 
 
22.	How can the risks associated with the use of spreadsheets be mitigated?   (p.671) 
•	Inventory where and how spreadsheets are used [and assess the risks involved]. 
•	Provide users with training on best practices to prevent and detect spreadsheet errors. 
•	Ensure that spreadsheets are closely guarded to avoid unauthorized access and tampering. 
•	Request internal audit to review how spreadsheets are used and protected. 
 
23.	What is a good approach for managing the risk of system implementation?  (p.672) 
There is no magic formula for implementation. It is mostly a matter of proper planning, execution and integration. Because system implementation involves many people and activities, it is necessary to reexamine the project plan at the beginning of the system implementation phase. A good approach is to develop a detailed implementation plan that builds on the initial project plan. The implementation plan should be reviewed by the project sponsor, and communicated to user groups for questions or comments prior to beginning the implementation. It is important to ensure that everyone is well informed and in agreement with the implementation activities. 
 
24.	Outline system implementation objectives and activities using a diagram.   (p.672) 
 
 
25.	How would you describe the main challenges (risks) of each of the following system implementation activity? (p.669-671) 
Activities 	Main Challenges / Risks 
Coding 	•	Select best (most appropriate) programming language and methodology. 
•	Develop logical program structure and instructions for data processing. 
•	Ensure all processing requirements and possible scenarios are covered. 
Testing 	•	Needs to be well planned and given all the attention it deserves. 
•	Often compressed because of delays encountered in prior phases. 
Installation 	•	High risk installation approaches often used (e.g. direct installation). 
•	Approach may be very costly (e.g. parallel installation). 
Documentation 	•	Incomplete or inaccurate documentation 
•	System documentation - maintenance and upgrade problems 
•	User documentation - errors, system not leveraged to full potential. 
Training 	• Insufficient or inadequate training - employee errors, low employee productivity, missed opportunities to leverage system to full potential. 
Support 	• Insufficient or inadequate support - employee errors, low employee productivity, missed opportunities to leverage system to full potential. 
 
26.	Explain data conversion and its importance as part of system implementation.   (p.675) 
New information systems typically require data to be imported to a new database, or to be adjusted within existing databases. The format of the old data may not be compatible with the new system, in which case the data needs to be modified before it can be imported. Data conversion is the transformation of old data from one format to another, to satisfy new system requirements. It can be tedious, time consuming and expensive. Data conversion may require the use of special software applications, or the development of programs using a computer language adapted for data conversion. 
 
27.	Outline important aspects to follow for conducting post-implementation reviews.   (p.676) 
•	Timeliness - should be conducted a few months after system implementation. 
•	Independence of reviewers - auditors or expert consultants not involved in the project. 
•	Content - analyses, observations, conclusions, recommendations, lessons learned. 
•	Information - why and how to emulate successes or prevent issues in the future. 
•	Reporting - executive committee, project sponsor, project manager, team members. 
•	Accountability - managers and employees accountable for results based on responsibilities. 
 
 
28.	What sort of problems and inefficiencies are created by the proliferation of information systems?   (p.677) 
•	Systems may use different programming languages, databases and operating systems.  
•	Systems may not be well integrated, or dependent on special interface programs for integration. 
•	Pockets of data scattered across multiple databases, some data may not be up-to-date and reliable.  
•	Diminished overall system performance, high maintenance costs, lower employee productivity. 
•	Logistical nightmare whenever a system needs to be upgraded or replaced, because of the many linkages and dependencies that may exist across applications and individual databases 
 
29.	The most common reason for cancelling ERP system implementation projects is discovering that the software does not support important business processes. How can this risk be mitigated? (p.678) It is very important to conduct a thorough analysis of requirements and vendor software functionalities before entering into an agreement to purchase an ERP system. A good approach is to complete the requirements definition phase [of system development analysis] and ask vendors to demonstrate how their solution meets requirements. Vendors should also be asked to provide a configured demo or prototype version of their software for experimentation. 
 
30.	Explain why and how software developers should be responsible for system maintenance.   (p.679) When system development is deficient and developers are not around to fix problems, system maintenance is a bit like cleaning up the mess left behind by someone else. Not a motivating prospect for anyone. An intelligent and effective approach is to assign developers the task of maintaining a new system for at least six months after it is implemented. If developers know that they will be responsible for resolving post-implementation issues, they will likely be a lot more attentive with their work during system development. Developers who demonstrate a poor track record of system development should not be allowed to work on new initiatives. 
 
31.	Explain how and why system performance and maintenance costs should be monitored.   (p.680) System performance and maintenance costs should be monitored. Key performance indicators include user satisfaction, number of change requests, annual maintenance costs, system response time, system crashes, and system downtime. Organizations need performance and cost information to determine when to replace systems. Overextending the life of an information system is rarely a wise thing to do, either from a strategic, operational or financial perspective. It leads to missed or delayed opportunities, low productivity and excessive costs, all of which affect competitiveness. 
 
32.	Explain why the advice of internal users and external consultants for extending or replacing an information system may be biased and how to mitigate this risk.   (p.680) 
It is important to remember that the advice of internal users and external consultants for extending or replacing an information system may be partial to their personal interests [i.e. jobs, maintenance contracts, etc.]. For this reason, the monitoring of system performance and maintenance costs should be assigned to a separate group that reports information directly to a committee of senior executives. 
 
33.	Explain why information technology security is a huge challenge and a growing problem.   (p.681) IT security is a huge challenge and a growing problem. The advent of the Internet and the use of communication networks for emails, texts, mobile devices and smart connected products creates many pathways for cybercriminals to attack and intrude on information technology systems. 
 
34.	What are the four categories of threats related to information technology security?   (p.683) 
•	Environmental disasters such as earthquakes, flooding and fire 
•	Hardware and software malfunction resulting in business interruptions 
•	Unintentional acts such as errors and omissions causing accidents or lost information. 
•	Criminal acts involving mischief, theft, vandalism or terrorism. 
 
 
 
35.	What physical security measures mitigate information technology security threats caused by external and internal environmental conditions?   (p.685) 
•	Facilities designed to withstand natural disasters such as earthquakes. 
•	Protection mechanisms such water resistant premises, fire resistant walls,  power surge protectors, and elevated floors for flooding protection. 
•	Detection mechanisms such sensors for air quality and temperature. 
•	Correction mechanisms such as water shut-off valves and back-up generators. 
 
36.	What is ethical hacking?   (p.687) 
Ethical hacking, commonly known as attack and penetration testing, is simulated hacking to test information system security and detect security vulnerabilities from the perspective of a hacker.  It is typically done by external IT security experts hired by an organization. 
 
37.	What is an incident response plan and what are its main objectives?   (p.688) 
•	Description - A procedure that outlines how to report security breaches, and how to react and recover from them. It is activated when security techniques fail to prevent or counter threats.  
•	Objectives - The main objectives of incident response plans are to manage digital security events in ways that limit damages, increase stakeholder confidence, and reduce recovery time and costs. 
 
38.	Explain what is cyber security insurance.   (p.688) 
Cyber security insurance typically covers three types of losses associated with data breaches, namely: 1) direct losses and liabilities from a data breach;  2) remediation costs for investigating the breach, notifying affected parties and taking other remedial actions; and 3) regulatory fines, penalties and settlement costs associated with the data breach. Depending on the insurer, losses associated with business interruptions due to cyber security incidents may be covered by cyber security insurance policies, or may be covered by general property and casualty insurance policies. 
 
39.	What are the three steps for disaster recovery planning?   (p.690) 
•	First step - determine how long each information technology system can remain unavailable without causing major operational issues. This timeline is called a recovery time objective. 
•	Second step - determine the recovery point objective for each system, namely the point in time after which data obsolescence [missing data] becomes a problem. 
•	Third step - establish formal procedures and arrangements for meeting the recovery time and recovery point objectives of each information technology system. 
 
 
Multiple Choice Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Information technology systems are best described as: 
a)	Systems that capture and process transactional data only. 
b)	Systems that capture, process, archive and report information using computers. 
c)	Systems that provide information for decision-making and reporting. 
d)	Systems that perform human-like activities using artificial intelligence. 
e)	Systems that operate robotics in a manufacturing environment. 
f)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.648 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
2. Information management risks include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Interruption, downtime or instability of computer systems. 
b)	Unreliable, unavailable or untimely information. 
c)	Inadequate or insufficient computer system functionalities. 
d)	Loss, corruption, destruction or theft of information 
e)	Computer systems that are costly to operate and maintain. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	b) 
d) 	p.649 
3. Information technology system risks include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Interruption, downtime or instability of computer systems. 
b)	Unreliable, unavailable or untimely information. 
c)	Inadequate or insufficient computer system functionalities. 
d)	Loss, corruption, destruction or theft of information 
e)	Information that is costly to manage and secure. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.649 
4. The main activities for managing information systems are: 
a)	Information management, system implementation, system development, system maintenance, and system access. 
b)	Data management, information management, knowledge management, system development and system maintenance. 
c)	Information management, system development, system integration, system maintenance, and system protection. 
d)	System planning and analysis, system design, system implementation, system integration, system maintenance, and system security. 
e)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.649 
5. The dual roles of information technology functions are: 
a)	Operational support systems and management information systems. 
b)	Strategic planning and operational planning. 
c)	Information management and information technology management. 
d)	Strategic leadership and operational support. 
e)	System development and system maintenance. 
f)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.650 
6. Sources of risk that prevent IT functions from delivering strategic and value added services to organizational functions and units include:   (select all that apply) a) Policies, procedures, values and ethics. 
b)	Lack of clear priorities, and misinformed decisions and resource allocations. 
c)	Misalignment of services, talent shortages and language barriers. 
d)	Misunderstanding of the objectives and risks of information technology. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 
c) 	p.650-651 
7. The language barrier between IT professionals and business managers is caused by: 
a)	Different first languages such as English, Spanish, Chinese and Japanese. 
b)	A lack of common purpose and unwillingness to collaborate to resolve issues. 
c)	The inability to understand and accept each other’s realities and priorities. 
d)	Different backgrounds and the use of jargon or technical terms. 
e)	The use of emails and texts instead of in-person communications and consultations. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.651 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
8. A survey conducted in 2018 reveals that only ________ of organizations have a clear process for prioritizing information technology investments. a) Five percent 
b)	Fifteen percent 
c)	Thirty-five percent 
d)	Sixty-five percent 
e)	Seventy-five percent 	c) 	p.651 
9. A survey conducted in 2018 reveals that _________ of organizations have “limited or no digital vision or strategy.” a) Twelve percent 
b)	Twenty-two percent 
c)	Forty-two percent 
d)	Sixty-two percent 
e)	Eighty-two percent 	c) 	p.650 
10. General computer control categories are: 
a)	Governance, management and maintenance, development and integration, security 
b)	Input controls, processing controls, output controls and security controls 
c)	Management, implementation, development, maintenance, update, security 
d)	Application software, databases, computers and devices, network infrastructure e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.652 
11. Information technology management challenges include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Governance, maintenance, implementation, development, integration. 
b)	Ineffective governance, lack of attention to software, limited information. 
c)	Unclear priorities, unavailable services, talent shortages, excessive turnover. 
d)	Proliferation of systems, system development failures, system maintenance costs. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 
d) 	p.653-654 
12. The main causes of system development failures include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Lack of senior executive support and lack of management accountability for results 
b)	Employee resistance to change and resource constraints. 
c)	Excessive complexity, scope increases, technical incompetence. 
d)	Lack of end user participation in the development process. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.653 
13. Organizations have a tendency to create a patchwork of systems over time (leading to higher maintenance costs and risks) because:   (select all that apply) a) Many system development projects fail and have to be restarted. 
b)	Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems are too complex to implement. 
c)	It is a better approach keep track of data and users if separate systems are used. 
d)	It is easier to create new applications for additional functionalities and information. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.654 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
14. System maintenance costs are a huge challenge for many organization because: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Maintenance costs can represent a significant portion of the total IT budget. 
b)	Costly system maintenance limits the ability to invest in new technology solutions. 
c)	Huge maintenance costs are attributable to old systems, customized systems, and systems developed in-house, which cannot be easily modified or upgraded. 
d)	Organizations with thin profit margins are limited in making IT investments. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.654 
15. Information management is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	The filing of data and documents into organized electronic and paper files. 
b)	The storage of information into database and computer applications. 
c)	The combination of activities for capturing, accumulating, processing, organizing, analyzing, disseminating, archiving and protecting data and information. 
d)	The activities aimed at converting data and information into valuable insights,  and making those insights available to those who need them. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.655 
16. The benefits of information and knowledge management include:  
(select all that apply) 
a)	Reduced uncertainties and greater operational efficiency. 
b)	Improved strategies and decisions, and more effective marketing. 
c)	Employee empowerment and flatter management structures. 
d)	Better coordination among organizational groups. 
e)	Ability to effectively train new employees and transfer knowledge. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	f) 	p.655 
17. Sources of risks that affect information management initiatives include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Absent leadership, and lack of vision and methods for information management. 
b)	Talent shortages and misguided approaches for implementing initiatives. 
c)	Proliferation of systems and system development failures. 
d)	Ineffective system development, system maintenance and protection. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.656-657 
18. The right approach that should be taken for implementing information and knowledge management solutions is to initially:   (select all that apply) a) Manage these projects using techniques similar to other IT projects. 
b)	Educate employees on the benefits of information and knowledge management. 
c)	Focus on data and information needs for making valid decisions. 
d)	Identify the best technology solution that can provide the most information. 
e)	Concentrate on understanding what business problems need to be solved. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	c) 
e) 	p.657 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
19. Approximately ________ of organizational information is considered inaccurate or incomplete. 
a)	Five percent. 
b)	Ten percent. 
c)	Fifteen percent. 
d)	Twenty percent. 
e)	Twenty-five percent. 	e) 	p.657 
20. Approximately ________ of executives report that their data analytics program is ineffective. 
a)	Five percent. 
b)	Ten percent. 
c)	Twenty-five percent. 
d)	Fifty percent 
e)	Eighty percent. 	c) 	p.656 
21. Information system planning is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	The activities carried out for making decisions about information technology solutions, and for managing the implementation of those solutions. 
b)	Done holistically at the enterprise level for all information systems, and for each individual information technology initiative. 
c)	The activities required to plan the execution phases of system development, namely the analysis, design and implementation phases. 
d)	Done for specific information technology initiatives or projects using a project charter, and a project plan that outlines project activities, milestones and timelines. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.659 
22. The main activities of information system planning are: 
a)	Define requirements, identify priorities, analyze alternatives, determine solutions, and manage their implementation. 
b)	Priority management, project management, team management, change management. 
c)	Planning, priority setting, decision-making, resource allocation, progress reports. 
d)	Defining and confirming project objectives and scope, establishing a project management structure, and deciding on a system development methodology. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.659 
23. The main reasons for information technology project failures are:  
(select all that apply) 
a)	Weak project ownership, unrealistic expectations and unclear objectives. 
b)	Poor governance, lack of talent, insufficient budget and poor methodologies. 
c)	Poor quality of results, excessive costs, and missed implementation deadlines. 
d)	Lack of long term vision and inadequate management of priorities. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.659-660 
24. A study conducted by an international information technology research and advisory firm, reveals that more than __________ of IT projects are failures. a) Ten percent. 
b)	Twenty percent. 
c)	Thirty percent. 
d)	Forty percent. 	c) 	p.659 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
25. Factors that make information technology projects successful include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Management of priorities and senior executive commitment. 
b)	Clearly defined project objectives, requirements and scope. 
c)	Project team qualifications and project management rigor. 
d)	System develop or vendor selection, and end-user involvement. 
e)	Change management, risk management and complexity reduction. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	f) 	p. 661-662 
26. Change management is a critical success factor for information system planning because:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Information technology initiatives often have major implications on employee roles and responsibilities, which creates anxiety and resistance to change. 
b)	Managing change requires a project management plan and methodology. 
c)	Information technology initiatives are often difficult to implement and require all employees to double-down on their efforts to convert existing systems to new ones. 
d)	Information system planning typically does not require end-user involvement. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.661 
27. The main drivers of risk for information technology initiatives are: 
a)	Project size and complexity. 
b)	Project costs and implementation timelines. 
c)	Project management applications and methods. 
d)	Team management and change management. 
e)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.662 
28. Information system development is: 
a)	The activities carried out for making decisions about information technology solutions, and for managing the implementation of those solutions. 
b)	The activities to plan and carry out a specific information technology initiative. 
c)	The activities required to plan the execution phases of system development. 
d)	The analysis, design and implementation of information technology initiatives. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.663 
29. Project management frameworks and methodologies are: 
a)	Specific - they specifically support information technology initiatives. 
b)	Generic - they support any kind of initiative, including information technology. 	b) 	p.663 
30. System development planning is: 
a)	The activities carried out for making decisions about information technology solutions, and for managing the implementation of those solutions. 
b)	The activities required to plan the execution phases of a specific system development initiative, namely the analysis, design and implementation phases.  	b) 	p.663 
31. A project plan should never be a static document mainly because: 
a)	It is a preliminary judgment of the activities required to carry out a project. 
b)	It needs to be updated on a monthly basis for reporting to senior management. 
c)	It cannot exceed one year because of budget allocations and reallocations. 
d)	The methodologies used for managing projects may have to be updated. 
e)	Information technology priorities may not be the same from year to year. 	a) 	p.664 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
32. Individual information technology project charters and plans should be approved  at the enterprise-level because: 
a)	All individual information technology projects are managed at the enterprise level. 
b)	They should reviewed independently to ensure that they are consistent with enterprise-level directions for information systems and project management. 
c)	Senior management would likely not otherwise be informed that projects are being started and that funds and resources are allocated to them. 
d)	Every project sponsor has to be informed about the projects affecting them. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.664 
33. System development analysis is: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	A structured analysis of an information system to determine if it should be further developed, upgraded or disposed of. 
b)	A method used to analyze the development of an information system. 
c)	A structured examination of system requirements from a strategic, operational, technical and financial perspective.  
d)	A process to analyze if the benefits of development outweigh their costs. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.664-665 
34. A needs analysis for system development is an activity that involves: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	An analysis of project management needs for system development. 
b)	Identifying, analyzing and documenting information and process requirements. 
c)	Determining if a solution exists, and if it is achievable and advantageous. 
d)	Analyzing the costs and benefits of possible solutions identified. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.665 
35. The risk of business process reengineering in the context of system development is: 
a)	Transforming existing processes in ways incompatible with the new system. 
b)	Scope reduction, namely scaling down system development to a process redesign. 
c)	Adopting new processes that cannot be automated as easily as old ones. 
d)	Scope creep, namely trying to accomplish too much within a given project. e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.666 
36. Organizations should develop custom software solutions only if:  
(select all that apply) 
a)	Adequate solutions are not available from software vendors. 
b)	Custom solutions are necessary to maintain a competitive advantage. 
c)	Employees are available to develop the solutions in-house. 
d)	The costs of custom solutions is lower or equal to software developers. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.666 
37. Important criteria to consider when selecting a vendor of software include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Software that meets organizational requirements. 
b)	Reputation of the vendor. 
c)	Ability to provide adequate user support and software maintenance. 
d)	Software, support and maintenance reasonably priced. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.667 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
38. Important criteria to consider when selecting a developer of software include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Reputation and experience with similar projects and clients. 
b)	Qualifications and experience of the personnel assigned to the project. 
c)	System development approach and methodology. 
d)	Approach for training employees and transferring knowledge to them. 
e)	Price of the services and post-implementation support capability. f) 	All of the above. 
g) None of the above. 	f) 	p.667 
39. Areas of concern with cloud computing include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Reliance on internally hosted servers (computers) and applications. 
b)	Unclear information security arrangements. 
c)	Proximity of servers (computers), data centers and information. 
d)	Unclear responsibilities in the event of data breaches. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	b) 
d) 	p.667 
40. The main area of concern with cloud-based services for information technology is: a) Reliance on the Internet. 
b)	Inability to implement custom software solutions. 
c)	Cost of services that may become unaffordable. 
d)	Information technology security. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	d) 	p.668 
41. The risks associated with outsourcing information technology services include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Inflexible contracts and loss of control. 
b)	Unfulfilled promises and poor services. 
c)	Limitations in the services that can be outsourced. 
d)	Higher costs than running systems internally. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.668 
42. System design is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	The conceptualization of a system solution that meets requirements. 
b)	Similar to a blueprint, namely a set of drawings and explanations that illustrate  and outline system specifications. It may also include a prototype solution. 
c)	Analogous to a picture, a list of ingredients, a method to follow for a recipe,  with an optional sample provided for tasting by a culinary chef. 
d)	Broken down into logical design and physical design. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.668 
43. The components of logical system design include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Business processes and user-system interfaces. 
b)	Input, data processing, output and data storage. 
c)	Networks, desktop computers and other devices 
d)	Servers, websites, applications and databases. 
e)	Security systems and operating systems. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.669 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
44. The risk of user-system interface design can be described as: 
a)	Processes not sufficiently automated or process workarounds to fit the system, resulting in lower productivity and higher operating costs. 
b)	Applications that are not user-friendly, not intuitive, or awkward looking, resulting in lower productivity, higher costs and unreliable information. 
c)	Ineffective methods and techniques for preventing, detecting and correcting data entry errors resulting in unreliable information. 
d)	Modules and programs that do not meet requirements, or are not properly integrated, resulting in higher costs and unreliable information. 
e)	Not properly anticipating management information needs, resulting in workarounds, higher operating costs, and misguided actions or decisions. f) 	None of the above. 	b) 	p.670 
45. The risk of input design can be described as: 
a)	Processes not sufficiently automated or process workarounds to fit the system, resulting in lower productivity and higher operating costs. 
b)	Applications that are not user-friendly, not intuitive, or awkward looking, resulting in low productivity, higher costs and unreliable information. 
c)	Ineffective methods and techniques for preventing, detecting and correcting data entry errors resulting in unreliable information. 
d)	Modules and programs that do not meet requirements, or are not properly integrated, resulting in higher costs and unreliable information. 
e)	Not properly anticipating management information needs, resulting in workarounds, higher operating costs, and misguided actions or decisions. f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.670 
46. The risk of output design can be described as: 
a)	Processes not sufficiently automated or process workarounds to fit the system, resulting in lower productivity and higher operating costs. 
b)	Applications that are not user-friendly, not intuitive, or awkward looking, resulting in low productivity, higher costs and unreliable information. 
c)	Ineffective methods and techniques for preventing, detecting and correcting data entry errors resulting in unreliable information. 
d)	Modules and programs that do not meet requirements, or are not properly integrated, resulting in higher costs and unreliable information. 
e)	Not properly anticipating management information needs, resulting in workarounds, higher operating costs, and misguided actions or decisions. f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.670 
47. The main risk associated with the use of spreadsheets is best described as: 
a)	Incorrect data input, accidental copy and paste, omissions of a negative sign, erroneous range selections and unintentional deletions causing errors. 
b)	Spreadsheet errors that affect analyses, decision making and reporting, resulting  misguided decisions, misleading reports, potential losses and compliance issues. 
c)	Not having an inventory of spreadsheets, and not providing users with training  on the use of spreadsheets, resulting in decision-making and reporting errors. 
d)	Inability to integrate all user requirements into system development design, resulting in the use of spreadsheets that are out of control and unaudited. 	b) 	p.671 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
48. The risks associated with the use of spreadsheets can be mitigated by: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Developing an inventory of where and how spreadsheets are used. 
b)	Providing training on best practices to prevent and detect spreadsheet errors. 
c)	Protecting spreadsheets against unauthorized access and tampering. 
d)	Requesting internal audits to review how spreadsheets are used and protected. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.671 
49. System implementation is: 
a)	The creation of an information system in accordance with specifications. 
b)	The operationalization of an information system in accordance with specifications. 
c)	The creation and operationalization of an information system in accordance with specifications. 
d)	The design and operationalization of an information system in accordance with specifications. 
e)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.672 
50. The main risk of system implementation is best described as: 
a)	The inability to deliver a solution that works, and that users understand and accept. 
b)	The failure to implement an information system on time and within budget. 
c)	The absence of system implementation planning and execution. 
d)	The inability to deliver a cost-effective solution that meets reporting requirements. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.672 
51. Many well-designed information systems fail during implementation because of: 
a)	Defective planning and design, inadequate project management, excessive costs. 
b)	Defective coding, inadequate testing, faulty installation, or insufficient training. 
c)	Defective planning and design, inadequate testing, or insufficient training. 
d)	Defective coding, delayed testing, phased installation, or inadequate support. e) None of the above. 	b) 
 	p.672 
52. A good approach for managing the risk of system implementation is to: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Request a sign-off of the system design by the project sponsor and end-users. 
b)	Develop a detailed implementation plan that builds on the initial project plan. 
c)	Ensure that everyone is informed and in agreement with implementation activities. 
d)	Create a back-up of the old system in case it needs to be restored. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 
c) 	p.672 
53. User-focused activities related to system implementation include: 
a)	Coding, testing, and installation. 
b)	Documentation, training, and support. 
c)	Project planning, system design, system development. 
d)	Inspection, walkthrough, desk checking, integration testing. 
e)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.672 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
54. The main challenge or risk related to system implementation testing is: 
a)	Managers who are too busy with day-to-day activities. 
b)	Users that are not willing or able to conduct proper user-acceptance tests. 
c)	Testing of a prototype solution instead of testing the actual system. 
d)	Insufficient time allocated to testing as a result of delays in prior phases. 
e)	Inadequate tests that do not provide conclusive or statistically valid results. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.673-674 
55. The main challenge or risk related to system implementation installation is: 
a)	The high cost of installation that can easily go over budget. 
b)	The inability to implement a phased installation approach. 
c)	Resistance from end-users to accept training and new job responsibilities. 
d)	The high risk of each installation approach, especially direct installation. e) None of the above. 	b) 
 	p.674-675 
56. User acceptance testing includes: 
a)	Design testing, installation testing, documentation testing, support testing. 
b)	Code inspection, desk checking, unit testing, integration testing, and system testing. 
c)	Application testing, system performance testing, stress testing and recovery testing. 
d)	Project team testing, manager testing, end-user testing, auditor testing. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.673 
57. A phased location installation approach involves: 
a)	Installing the new system and decommissioning the old one in two distinct phases. 
b)	Running the new and old systems in parallel sequentially in each location. 
c)	First installing the new system in one location, and rolling it out only if successful. 
d)	Installing the new system one module at a time in selected locations only. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.674 
58. Prudent approaches for system implementation (installation) include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Using a phased location or phased functionality approach if possible. 
b)	Conducting extensive testing prior to installation. 
c)	Operating the old system in parallel for a short period after installation. d) All of the above. 
e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.674 
59. Data conversion is: 
a)	The conversion of data into binary codes for computer processing. 
b)	The modification of data into information and knowledge for strategic purposes. 
c)	The transformation of data to alternate formats to satisfy new system requirements. 
d)	The manipulation of data from external sources to enable environmental scanning. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.675 
60. The main challenge or risk with data conversion is that: 
a)	The conversion of data may downgrade system performance. 
b)	Managers may not be aware of their information and knowledge needs. 
c)	It can be tedious, time consuming and expensive. 
d)	The data from external sources may not be accurate and complete. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.675 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
61. Post-implementation review criteria include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Achievement of project objectives. 
b)	Quality solution implemented on time and within budget. 
c)	System reliability, resolution of issues, and user satisfaction. 
d)	Comprehensive documentation, user training and user support. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.676 
62. Important aspects to follow for conducting post-implementation reviews include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Timeliness - the review should be conducted a few years after implementation. 
b)	Independence of reviewers - individuals that were not involved in the project. 
c)	Information - analyze how to emulate success or prevent failures in the future. 
d)	Accountability - projects sponsors are accountable for implementation results. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 
c) 	p.676 
63. Organization often have major challenges with systems integration because: 
a)	Over time, existing organizational systems become more complex due to additional functionalities and user requirements. The new functionalities and user requirements create integration issues because they are not always compatible with other business processes and systems. Accordingly, new systems have to be developed. 
b)	Every information system uses different servers, connectors, computers, printers, communication devices and network infrastructure. The proliferation of hardware components causes major compatibility issues for software integration. 
c)	Over time, organizations accumulate a patchwork of information systems across their management functions and business units. The accumulation results from creating new software applications every time new processes are implemented,  or whenever additional functionalities or information are requested. d) None of the above. 	c) 	p.677 
64. The inefficiencies created by the proliferation of information systems include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Requirements for multiple interface programs to link different systems.  
b)	Unreliable or incomplete data scattered across many different databases. 
c)	Diminished system performance and low employee productivity. 
d)	High maintenance costs and logistical nightmare whenever a system needs to be upgraded or replaced because of linkages and dependencies across systems. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.677 
65. A good solution for system integration is to: 
a)	Replace existing systems with an ERP software solution that integrates multiple applications and functionalities into modules and shared databases.  
b)	Consider using paper forms and manual processes to avoid integration problems. 
c)	Implement a data warehouse for systems to store data in a single database. 
d)	Replace all hardware components to a single vendor of integrated hardware. 
e)	Outsource system maintenance or migrate existing systems to the cloud. f) 	None of the above. 	a) 	p.677 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
66. The most common reason for cancelling ERP implementation projects is: 
a)	Falling behind on the implementation schedule or incurring excessive costs. 
b)	Running into significant challenges for the setup and configuration of the system. 
c)	Not having enough qualified information systems professionals to complete the job. 
d)	Discovering that the ERP solution does not support important business processes. 
e)	Realizing that ERP software vendors cannot provide adequate end-user support. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.677-678 
67. A good approach for mitigating the risk of ERP implementation failure is to: 
a)	Plan for longer implementation timelines and higher costs. 
b)	Hire external consultants experienced with ERP system setup and configuration. 
c)	Cancel other projects to staff ERP project teams with more resources. 
d)	Conduct a thorough analysis of business requirements and ask ERP vendors to demonstrate whether / how their solution meets business requirements. 
e)	Obtain references from ERP vendor clients to validate end-user support. f) 	None of the above. 	d) 	p.678 
68. The benefits of ERP information systems include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	End to end process integration across functions. 
b)	More reliable information (use of common databases) 
c)	Support available from major software vendors 
d)	Cheaper to operate and maintain once installed. 
e)	Facilitates the management of computer security. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	f) 	p.678 
69. The challenges associated with ERP systems include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Complex to understand and properly configure. 
b)	Typically require process transformation or extensive customization. 
c)	Difficult, expensive and time consuming to implement. 
d)	Requires extensive user training. 
e)	User resistance to change may be significant. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	f) 	p.678 
70. System maintenance is:   (select all that apply) 
a)	The processing of modifications, updates and upgrades to information systems.  
b)	Inclusive of software maintenance and hardware maintenance. 
c)	Done to correct deficiencies, and respond to evolving needs and opportunities. 
d)	An indicator of system development performance. 
e)	All of the above. 
f)	None of the above. 	e) 	p.678 
71. System maintenance an indicator of system development performance because: 
a)	Poor system maintenance causes system development failures. 
b)	System maintenance is negatively correlated with system development results. 
c)	Poor system development causes more system maintenance. 
d)	System development performance is based on prior system issues and failures. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.678-679 
72. The four categories of system maintenance are: 
a)	Corrective, adaptive, perfective, and preventive. 
b)	Reactive, preventive, adaptive and predictive. 
c)	None of the above. 	a) 	p.679 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
73. Adaptive maintenance is meant to: 
a)	Address design or performance issues, missing functionality and processing errors. 
b)	Evolve system functionality in response to changing needs, opportunities, etc. 
c)	Enhance or improve user experience, system performance, and productivity. 
d)	Prevent o reduce the likelihood of system failure or security breaches. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.679 
74. Information system change requests are a risk because:  (select all that apply) 
a)	The changes requested may not be consistent with overall system directions. 
b)	The changes requested may affect information systems integrity. 
c)	Change requests may not be properly reviewed and authorized. 
d)	Change requests may not be appropriately logged in a case management system. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.679-680 
75. Software version control is a risk because:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Changes to software may cause information systems to malfunction or crash. 
b)	Not taking appropriate back-ups before version updates can lead to problems. 
c)	Software updates may not come from valid or reliable sources. 
d)	A dedicated person within IT services may not have been appointed. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
c) 	p.680 
76. System performance and maintenance costs should be monitored because: 
a)	Such information is relevant to determine when to replace systems. 
b)	Maintenance costs need to be budgeted for the following year. 
c)	System failures can be difficult to prevent or detect. 
d)	Such information is not otherwise available from software vendors. e) None of the above. 	a) 	p.680 
77. Information technology security is best described as: 
a)	The protection of data, information and knowledge used by an organization to  make decision and report information to stakeholders and regulators. 
b)	The establishment of secure office areas and the hiring of security guards to protect computer systems from hazards, vandalism, theft and other potential crimes. 
c)	The protection of information technology systems for preserving their integrity and availability, and for safeguarding the confidentiality of information. 
d)	The development of security mechanisms to help prevent or detect cybercrime. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.681 
78. The three main objectives of information technology security are: 
a)	Validity, reliability, operability. 
b)	Accuracy, completeness, timeliness. 
c)	Integrity, availability, confidentiality. 
d)	Prevention, protection, detection. 
e)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.681 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
79. The consequences of information technology security issues include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Loss or theft of data and information. 
b)	Business interruptions. 
c)	Brand and reputation damage. 
d)	Lost of stakeholder confidence. 
e)	Regulatory fines and potential lawsuits. 
f)	All of the above. 
g)	None of the above. 	f) 	p.681 
80. The four categories of threats related to information technology security include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Environmental disasters such as earthquakes, flooding and fire. 
b)	Hardware and software malfunction resulting in business interruptions. 
c)	Unintentional acts such as errors and omissions causing accidents or lost information 
d)	Criminal acts involving mischief, theft, vandalism or terrorism. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	e) 	p.683 
81. Common types of cyberattacks include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Hacking, hijacking, spamming and spoofing. 
b)	Denial of service, typo squatting, and cross site scripting. 
c)	Virus, worms, botnets, trojan horses and time bombs. 
d)	Spyware, ransomware, scareware, and keylogger software. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	a) 
b) 	p.683 
82. The components of an IT security framework are: 
a)	Security policies and procedures, assigned roles and responsibilities, inherent risk identification and assessment, action plan, and post-implementation audit. 
b)	Network security, software security, hardware security and physical security. 
c)	Security objectives, security policies and procedures, assigned roles, responsibilities and accountabilities, risk assessment, and action plan. 
d)	Management of system maintenance and change request management, software version control, and vendor software update control. 
e)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.684 
83. Physical security measures that mitigate IT security threats caused by external and internal environment conditions include:  (select all that apply) 
a)	Authentication mechanisms such as access cards and biometric authentication. 
b)	Facilities designed to withstand natural disasters such as earthquakes. 
c)	Surveillance mechanisms such as security guards and video surveillance. 
d)	Protection mechanisms such water resistant premises, fire resistant walls,  power surge protectors, and elevated floors for flooding protection. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	b) 
d) 	p.685 
84. In the context of digital security, authorization is: 
a)	The verification (validation) of the identity of users using passwords. 
b)	The restriction of user access rights to systems and functionalities. 
c)	The approval of employees authorized to make changes to systems. 
d)	The authority to monitor employee behaviors related to computer usage. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.687 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
85. In the context of digital security, intrusion detection is: 
a)	The detection of intruders who gain unauthorized access to office locations. 
b)	The monitoring of network traffic to block signals based on security rules. 
c)	The tracking of access to systems using access logs built-in systems. 
d)	The monitoring of system use to detect unauthorized access or suspicious activity. e) None of the above. 	d) 	p.687 
86. An incident response plan is: 
a)	A plan that helps organization maintain the continuity of their business operations. 
b)	A plan that minimizes the effects of information technology system interruptions and quickly restores systems to a normal state of operation. 
c)	A plan or procedure that outlines how to report information technology security breaches, and how to react and recover from them.  
d)	A plan that prepares an organization to respond to public emergencies. e) None of the above. 	c) 	p.688 
87. Information privacy means that: 
a)	Employees have the right to not provide information that is private. 
b)	Organizations must protect the information collected from individuals. 
c)	Information cannot be shared with another organization under any circumstances. 
d)	Private information should not be shared on social media platforms. e) None of the above. 	b) 	p.688 
88. Information privacy principles include:   (select all that apply) 
a)	Collecting information from individuals only for a legitimate purpose. 
b)	Having a designated data controller able to demonstrate regulatory compliance. 
c)	Making sure that information is appropriately secured and encrypted. 
d)	Notifying individuals of data breaches within a specified timeframe. 
e)	Obtaining consent for the information collected and how it is used. 
f)	Informing about usage and giving options to rectify or delete the information. g) All of the above. 
h) None of the above. 	g) 	p.689 
89. Actions for ensuring the privacy and confidentiality of information include: 
(select all that apply) 
a)	Developing policies for the collection and use of personal information. 
b)	Identifying and classifying all information that must be protected. 
c)	Training employees on how to use and secure information. 
d)	Restricting physical and digital access to sensitive and personal information. 
e)	Ensuring that all sensitive and personal information is encrypted. 
f)	Destroying or deleting sensitive or personal information no longer required. 
g)	Monitoring access to information and compliance to privacy policies. h) All of the above. 
	i) 	None of the above. 	h) 	p.689 
90. A disaster recovery plan is: 
a)	The same thing as a business continuity plan. 
b)	A plan to prevent or react to events that threaten the continuity of operations. 
c)	A plan that usually focuses on the continuity of computer systems. 
d)	A plan that prepares an organization to respond to public emergencies. e) All of the above. 
	f) 	None of the above. 	c) 	p.458 
p.691 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
91. A recovery time objective is based on: 
a)	The time it takes to recover data from storage systems located externally. 
b)	How long each information technology system can remain unavailable without causing major operational issues. 
c)	The amount of time needed to back-up information systems to an offsite location. 
d)	The point in time after which data obsolescence [the amount of missing data] becomes a problem for operational recovery. 
e)	None of the above. 	b) 	p.690 
92. The three steps for disaster recovery planning are: 
a)	-  Determine which systems should be backed-up and the back-up frequency. -  Develop back-up procedures and test the back-ups for system recovery. -  Make arrangements for offsite back-up storage and computing services. 
b)	-  Determine how long each information system can remain unavailable. -  Determine how much data can be lost without causing problems. 
-  Establish formal procedures and arrangements for meeting recovery objectives. c) None of the above. 	b) 	p.690 
93. The three procedures and arrangements for disaster recovery are: 
a)	-  Determine the recovery time objective for each system. 
-	Determine the recovery point objective for each system. -  Establish formal procedures for meeting the objectives. 
b)	-  Software and data back-ups. 
-	Arrangements for cloud-based solutions. 
-	Arrangements for employees to work from home. 
c)	-  Software and data back-ups. -  Alternate processing sites. 
-	Alternate working arrangements. 
d)	None of the above. 	c) 	p.690-691 
 
 
True or False Questions 
 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
1. Information technology systems are systems that capture, process, archive and report information using computer-based technologies.  	True 	p.648 
2. Operational support systems are systems that focus on providing management information for decision making and reporting. 	False 	p.648 
3. Management support systems are systems that focus on capturing and processing transactional data and creating transactional documents. 	False 	p.648 
4. In the field of information management, the terms data, information and knowledge have a similar meaning. 	False 	p.648 
5. Information management risks include unreliable, unavailable, and untimely information, as well as loss, corruption, destruction, or theft of information. 	True 	p.649 
6. Information technology risks include interruption, downtime or instability of computer systems, as well as damage, destruction, theft or vandalism of computer equipment. 	True 	p.649 
7. The main activities for managing information technology systems are information management, system development and integration, and system maintenance, protection. 	True 	p.649 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
8. The main activities for managing information systems are system planning, system design, system implementation and integration, and system maintenance and security. 	False 	p.649 
9. Information technology functions have difficulty providing strategic and value added services. Few executives report that their IT leaders are closely involved with strategy. 	True 	p.650 
10. Information technology functions are known to provide strategic and value added services. Most executives agree that their IT leaders are good contributors to strategy. 	False 	p.650 
11. Very few organizations nowadays do not have a clear digital vision or strategy. 	False 	p.650 
12. Thirty-five percent of organizations do not have a clear process for prioritizing information technology investments based on a survey of chief information officers. 	False 	p.651 
13. Sources of risk that prevent IT functions from delivering strategic and value added services include lack of clear priorities, misalignment of services and talent shortages. 	True 	p.650-651 
14. Sources of risk that prevent IT functions from delivering strategic and value added services include misunderstanding of the objectives and risks of information technology. 	False 	p.650-651 
15. The language barrier between IT professionals and business managers is caused by different backgrounds and the use of jargon or technical terms. 	True 	p.651 
16. The language barrier between IT professionals and business managers is caused by a lack of common purpose and unwillingness to collaborate to resolve issues. 	False 	p.651 
17. General computer control categories are application software, databases, computers, printers, communication devices, and network infrastructure. 	False 	p.652 
18. Application control categories are governance, management and maintenance, development and integration, and security. 	False 	p.653 
19. Information technology management challenges include ineffective governance, proliferation of systems, system development failures, system maintenance costs. 	True 	p.653-654 
20. The main causes of system development failures include lack of executive support,  lack of management accountability for results, and employee resistance to change. 	True 	p.653-654 
21. The main causes of system development failures include excessive complexity, technical incompetence, and lack of end user participation in the development process. 	True 	p.653-654 
22. Organizations have a tendency to create of patchwork of systems over time because it is often easier to create new applications for additional functionalities and information. 	True 	p.654 
23. Organizations have a tendency to create of patchwork of systems over time because they continually grow and adopt new or different market strategies. 	False 	p.654 
24. System maintenance is a significant expense for many organization. It can represent as much as eighty percent of the total budget allocated to information technology. 	True 	p.654 
25. System maintenance is not significant expense for most organization. It usually represents less than twenty percent of the total information technology budget. 	False 	p.654 
26. Information management is the activities for capturing, accumulating, processing, organizing, analyzing, disseminating, archiving and protecting data and information. 	True 	p.655 
27. Information management is the activities aimed at converting data and information into valuable insights, and making those insights available to those who need them. 	False 	p.655 
28. Knowledge management is the activities aimed at converting data and information into valuable insights, and making those insights available to those who need them. 	True 	p.655 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
29. Knowledge management is the activities for capturing, accumulating, processing, organizing, analyzing, disseminating, archiving and protecting data and information. 	False 	p.655 
30. The benefits of information and knowledge management include reduced uncertainties, improved strategies, better decisions, and greater operational efficiency. 	True 	p.655 
31. The benefits of information and knowledge management include flatter management structures, employee empowerment, and better coordination among groups. 	True 	p.655 
32. Sources of risks that affect information management initiatives include absent leadership, lack of vision, talent shortages, and misguided implementation approaches. 	True 	p.656-657 
33. Sources of risks that affect information management initiatives include proliferation of systems, system development failures, and costly data maintenance and protection. 	False 	p.656-657 
34. The implementation of information and knowledge management solutions requires a different implementation approach from other information technology solutions. 	True 	p.657 
35. The implementation of information and knowledge management solutions requires a similar approach to the implementation of other information technology solutions. 	False 	p.657 
36. Approximately twenty-five percent of organizational information is considered inaccurate or incomplete. 	True 	p.657 
37. In the context of knowledge management, codification refers to the documentation and storage of knowledge in database computer systems for easy retrieval by employees. 	True 	p.657 
38. In the context of knowledge management, codification refers to the use of password codes that employees can use to encrypt data and information for security purposes. 	False 	p.657 
39. In the context of knowledge management, personalization refers to individuals or groups that share information and knowledge person-to-person. 	True 	p.657-658 
40. In the context of knowledge management, personalization refers to the ability to obtain personalized education and professional training consistent with personal interests. 	False 	p.657-658 
41. Information system planning is the activities involved with making decisions about information technology solutions, and managing the implementation of those solutions. 	True 	p.659 
42. The main activities of information system planning are define requirements, identify priorities, analyze alternatives, determine solutions, and manage their implementation. 	True 	p.659 
43. Information system planning is the activities required to plan the execution phases of system development, namely the analysis, design and implementation phases. 	False 	p.659 
44. The main activities of information system planning are defining and confirming project objectives and scope, establishing a project management structure, and deciding on a system development methodology. 	False 	p.659 
45. The main reasons for information technology project failures are weak project ownership, unrealistic expectations and unclear objectives. 	True 	p.659-660 
46. The main reasons for information technology project failures are insufficient budgets, poor methodologies, excessive costs and missed implementation deadlines. 	False 	p.659-660 
47. Factors that make information technology projects successful include clearly defined project objectives and scope, project team qualifications and project management rigor. 	True 	p.661-662 
48. The main drivers of risk for IT initiatives are project size and complexity. 	True 	p.662 
49. The main drivers of risk for IT initiatives project management and methods. 	False 	p.662 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
50. A study conducted by an international information technology research and advisory firm reveals that the success rate of large information technology projects is less than twenty percent. 	True 	p.659 
51. Change management is a critical success factor for information system planning because information technology initiatives often have major implications on employee roles and responsibilities, which creates anxiety and resistance to change. 	True 	p.661 
52. Change management is a critical success factor for information system planning because information system planning typically does not require end-user involvement. 	False 	p.661 
53. Information system development is the activities required to plan and carry out specific information technology initiatives. 	True 	p.663 
54. Information system development is the activities carried out for making decisions about information technology solutions, and managing their implementation. 	False 	p.663 
55. Project management frameworks and methodologies are generic, given that they support any kind of initiative, including information technology initiatives. 	True 	p.663 
56. Project management frameworks and methodologies are specific given that they mostly support information technology initiatives. 	False 	p.663 
57. System development planning is the activities required to plan the execution phases of a specific system initiative, namely the analysis, design and implementation phases.  	True 	p.663 
58. System development planning is the activities carried out for making decisions about information technology solutions, and for managing their implementation. 	False 	p.663 
59. A project plan should never be a static document mainly because it is a preliminary judgment of the activities required to carry out a project. 	True 	p.664 
60. A project plan should never be a static document mainly because information technology priorities may not be the same from one year to the next. 	False 	p.664 
61. Individual information technology project charters and plans should be approved at the enterprise-level because they should reviewed independently to ensure consistency with enterprise-level directions for information systems and project management. 	True 	p.664 
62. Individual information technology project charters and plans should be approved at the enterprise-level because senior management would likely not otherwise be informed that projects are being started and that funds and resources are allocated to them. 	False 	p.664 
63. A project charter describes project objectives, scope, approach and management structure. 	True 	p.664 
64. A project charter describes project activities, milestones and timelines. 	False 	p.664 
65. System development analysis is a structured examination of system requirements  from a strategic, operational, technical and financial perspective.  	True 	p.664-665 
66. System development analysis is a method for analyzing the development of an information system, namely to decide if it should be developed or abandoned. 	False 	p.664-665 
67. A needs analysis for system development is an activity that involves identifying, analyzing and documenting information and process requirements. 	True 	p.665 
68. A needs analysis for system development is an activity that involves determining if a solution exists, and if it is achievable and advantageous. 	False 	p.665 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
69. The main risk of business process reengineering in the context of system development is scope creep, namely trying to accomplish too much within a given project. 	True 	p.666 
70. The main risk of business process reengineering in the context of system development is transforming existing processes in ways incompatible with the new system. 	False 	p.666 
71. Organizations should develop custom software solutions only if adequate solutions are not available from software vendors, and custom solutions are necessary to maintain a competitive advantage. 	True 	p.666 
72. Organizations should develop custom software solutions if employees are available to develop the solutions in-house at a cost lower or equal to software developers. 	False 	p.666 
73. Important criteria to consider when selecting a developer of software include reputation and experience with similar projects and clients. 	True 	p.666 
74. Important criteria to consider when selecting a vendor of software include system development approach and methodology. 	False 	p.666 
75. The main area of concern associated with cloud-based computer services is unclear arrangements and responsibilities regarding information technology security. 	True 	p.668 
76. The main area of concern associated with cloud-based computer services is reliance on the Internet and the possibility of power outages in data centers. 	False 	p.667 
77. The risks associated with outsourcing information technology services include loss of control, inflexible contracts, unfilled promises and poor services. 	True 	p.668 
78. The risks associated with outsourcing information technology services include limitations in the services that can be outsourced, and higher costs for services. 	False 	p.668 
79. System design is similar to a blueprint, namely a set of drawings and explanations that illustrate and outline system specifications. It may also include a prototype solution. 	True 	p.668 
80. The components of logical system design include business processes and user-system interfaces, input, data processing, output and data storage. 	True 	p.669 
81. The components of logical system design include networks, desktop computers, communication devices, servers, websites, applications and databases. 	False 	p.669 
82. The risk of user-system interface design involves applications that are not user-friendly, resulting in low productivity, higher costs and unreliable information. 	True 	p.670 
83. The risk of input design involves ineffective methods and techniques for preventing, detecting and correcting data entry errors resulting in unreliable information. 	True 	p.670 
84. The risk of output design involves not properly anticipating management information needs, resulting in higher operating costs, and misguided actions or decisions. 	True 	p.670 
85. The risk of user-system interface design involves business processes that are not sufficiently automated, resulting in lower productivity and higher operating costs. 	False 	p.670 
86. The risk of input design involves modules and programs that do not meet requirements, resulting in higher costs and unreliable information. 	False 	p.670 
87. The risk of output design involves ineffective methods and techniques for preventing, detecting and correcting data entry errors resulting in unreliable information. 	False 	p.670 
88. Large organizations can have hundreds of spreadsheets that supplement their information systems to support analysis, decision-making and reporting. 	True 	p.671 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
89. A survey estimates that less than ten percent of spreadsheets are error free. 	True 	p.671 
90. The main risk associated with the use of spreadsheets is the possibility of errors that affect analyses, decision making and reporting. 	True 	p.671 
91. The main risk associated with the use of spreadsheets is the lack of automation and excessive costs associated with developing and maintaining spreadsheets manually. 	False 	p.671 
92. The risks associated with spreadsheets can be mitigated by developing an inventory of where and how spreadsheets are used, providing training to users, and making sure that spreadsheets are adequately protected for unauthorized access and tampering. 	True 	p.671 
93. The risks associated with spreadsheets can be mitigated by applying logic tests to verify the spreadsheet results, and requesting audits of spreadsheet use and protection. 	True 	p.671 
94. System implementation is the creation and operationalization of an information system in accordance with specifications. 	True 	p.672 
95. System implementation is the planning and design of an information system in a manner consistent with specifications. 	False 	p.672 
96. The main risk of system implementation is the inability to deliver a solution that works well, and that users understand and accept. 	True 	p.672 
97. The main risk of system implementation is the inability to deliver a cost-effective solution that meets external reporting requirements. 	False 	p.672 
98. Many well-designed information systems fail during implementation because of defective coding, inadequate testing, faulty installation, or insufficient user training. 	True 	p.672 
99. Many well-designed information systems fail during implementation because phased implementation approaches are used which are too costly and time consuming. 	False 	p.672 
100. A good approach for managing the risk of system implementation is to: 
a)	develop a detailed implementation plan that builds on the initial project plan; and 
b)	ensure that everyone is informed and in agreement with implementation activities 	True 	p.672 
101. A good approach for managing the risk of system implementation is to: 
a)	ensure that end-users are involved as part of system design and development; and 
b)	use a direct installation approach that helps reduce installation risks and costs 	False 	p.672 
102. User-focused activities that are important for system implementation include documentation, training, and support. 	True 	p.672 
103. User-focused activities that are important for system implementation include inspection, walkthrough, desk checking, unit testing and integration testing. 	False 	p.672 
104. The main challenge or risk related to system implementation testing is insufficient  time allocated to testing as a result of delays in prior phases. 	True 	p.673-674 
105. The main challenge or risk related to system implementation installation is the high cost of installation that can easily go over budget, including data conversion costs. 	False 	p.673-674 
106. User acceptance testing includes application testing, system performance testing,  stress testing and recovery testing. 	True 	p.673 
107. User acceptance testing includes code inspection, desk checking, unit or module testing, integration testing, and system testing. 	False 	p.673 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
108. A phased location installation approach involves installing the new system in one location, and then rolling it out to new locations if the first installation is successful. 	True 	p.674 
109. A phased functionality installation approach involves installing the new system and decommissioning the old system one after the other, in two distinct phases. 	False 	p.674 
110. Prudent approaches for system implementation (installation) include: 
-	using a phased location or phased functionality approach if possible; 
-	conducting extensive testing prior to installation; and 
-	operating the old system in parallel for a short period after installation. 	True 	p.674 
111. Prudent approaches for system implementation (installation) include: 
-	using a direct installation approach to reduce implementation costs and timelines; -  delaying application testing until all data conversion is completed; and 
-	creating user groups where end-users can share knowledge with each other. 	False 	p.674 
112. Data conversion is the transformation of old data from one format to another, in order to satisfy new system requirements. 	True 	p.675 
113. Data conversion is the conversion of data into binary codes for computer processing. 	False 	p.675 
114. The main challenge or risk with data conversion is that it can be very tedious, time consuming and expensive. 	True 	p.675 
115. The main challenge or risk with data conversion is that managers may not be aware of their information and knowledge needs. 	False 	p.675 
116. Post-implementation review criteria include achievement of project objectives, quality solution on time and within budget, system reliability and user satisfaction. 	True 	p.676 
117. A post-implementation review should be conducted a few years after implementation, and should hold project sponsors accountable for the success of the implementation. 	False 	p.676 
118. Organizations have major challenges with information system integration mostly because new applications are often created every time new processes are implemented, or whenever additional functionalities or information are requested. 	True 	p.677 
119. Organizations have major challenges with information system integration mostly because every system uses different hardware components that are compatible. 	False 	p.677 
120. The inefficiencies created by the proliferation of information systems include unreliable data, diminished system performance, and low employee productivity. 	True 	p.677 
121. The inefficiencies created by the proliferation of information systems include excessive use of spreadsheets, unclear system ownership, and lack of data analytics. 	False 	p.677 
122. A good solution for information system integration is to replace existing systems with an ERP software system. 	True 	p.677 
123. A good solution for information system integration is to migrate all existing systems to the cloud and outsource system integration responsibilities. 	False 	p.677 
124. The most common reason for cancelling ERP implementation projects is falling behind on the implementation schedule or incurring excessive implementation costs. 	False 	p.677-678 
125. A good approach for mitigating the risk of ERP implementation failure is to conduct a thorough analysis of business requirements and ask vendors to demonstrate how their solution meets requirements. 	True 	p.678 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
126. The benefits of ERP information systems include end to end process integration across functions, more reliable information, and lower maintenance costs. 	True 	p.678 
127. The benefits of ERP information systems include easy setup and configuration, low implementation costs, limited customization, and little end-user training requirement. 	False 	p.678 
128. System maintenance the processing of modifications, updates and upgrades to information systems. It includes software maintenance and hardware maintenance. 	True 	p.678 
129. System maintenance is an indicator of system development performance. 	True 	p.678-679 
130. The categories of system maintenance are reactive, preventive, adaptive and predictive. 	False 	p.679 
131. Adaptive maintenance is meant to evolve system functionality in response to changing needs, operating environment, competitive pressures, opportunities to automate, etc. 	True 	p.679 
132. Perfective maintenance is meant to address software or hardware design or performance issues, missing functionality, data entry or processing errors, inadequate reports, etc.  	False 	p.679 
133. System performance and maintenance costs should be monitored because they are completely unpredictable and subject to variations based versions implemented. 	False 	p.680 
134. Information technology security is best described as the protection of information technology systems for preserving their integrity and availability, and for safeguarding the confidentiality of information. 	True 	p.681 
135. Information technology security is best described as secure offices with security guards to protect computer systems and information from hazards, theft or vandalism. 	False 	p.681 
136. The three main objectives of information technology security are integrity, availability and confidentiality. 	True 	p.681 
137. The three main objectives of information technology security are reliability, operability and disaster recovery. 	False 	p.681 
138. The consequences of information technology issues can be devastating. 	True 	p.681 
139. IT security is a huge concern for critical infrastructure and essential services such as power generation and distribution, water supply, telecommunications, banking, healthcare, transportation, emergency management, national defense and policing. 	True 	p.681 
140. IT security is not a huge concern for critical infrastructure and essential services organization because they are generally well prepared for cyberattacks. 	False 	p.681 
141. The categories of threats related to information technology security are environmental disasters, hardware and software malfunction, unintentional acts, and criminal acts. 	True 	p.683 
142. The categories of threats related to information technology security are hacking, hijacking, spamming, spoofing, denial of service, type squatting and cross-site scripting. 	False 	p.683 
143. The components of an IT security framework are security objectives, security policies, assigned roles, responsibilities and accountabilities, risk assessment, and action plan. 	True 	p.684 
144. The components of an IT security framework are maintenance management, change request management, software version control, and software update control. 	False 	p.684 
145. In the context of IT security, a risk assessment often takes the form of a vulnerability assessment, which is developed in relation to potential threats. 	True 	p.684 

Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
146. Physical security measures that mitigate IT security threats caused by external and internal environment conditions include: 
-	Facilities designed to withstand natural disasters such as earthquakes. 
-	Protection mechanisms such fire resistant premises and power surge protectors. 	True 	p.685 
147. Physical security measures that mitigate IT security threats caused by human behavior include: 
-	Authentication mechanisms such as access cards and biometric authentication. 
-	Surveillance mechanisms such as security guards and video surveillance. 	True 	p.685 
148. In the context of digital security, authorization is the restriction of user access rights to systems and functionalities. 	True 	p.687 
149. In the context of digital security, authentication is the verification of identity of users using passwords and other mechanisms such as security questions. 	True 	p.687 
150. In the context of digital security, intrusion detection is the detection of intruders who gain unauthorized access to office locations. 	False 	p.687 
151. In the context of digital security, access logs are logbooks that visitors must sign when they report to an information desk prior to accessing building premises. 	False 	p.687 
152. An incident response plan is a plan or procedure that outlines how to report information technology security breaches, and how to react and recover from them.  	True 	p.688 
153. An incident response plan is a plan that minimizes the effects of information technology interruptions and quickly restores systems to a normal state of operation. 	False 	p.688 
154. Information privacy means that organizations must protect the information collected from individuals such as employees and customers. 	True 	p.688 
155. Information privacy means that employees have the right to not provide information that is private such as their social security card, a citizenship identification card, etc. 	False 	p.688 
156. Information privacy principles include collecting information about individuals only for a legitimate purpose, collecting only what is required for achieving the purpose, and storing the information only for as long as it is necessary to achieve the purpose. 	True 	p.689 
157. Information privacy principles include giving employees access to their personal employee records, and letting them update or delete any information that they wish. 	False 	p.689 
158. Actions for ensuring the privacy and confidentiality of information include developing policies for the collection and use of personal information, identifying all information that needs to be protected, and training employees on using and securing information. 	True 	p.689 
159. Actions for ensuring the privacy and confidentiality of information include deleting personal information immediately after transactions are processed, and ensuring that information is never stored or processed outside of company offices. 	False 	p.689 
160. A disaster recovery plan is a plan that focuses on the continuity of computer systems. 	True 	p.691 
161. A disaster recovery plan prepares organizations to respond to public emergencies. 	False 	p.691 
162. A recovery time objective is based on how long each information technology system can remain unavailable without causing major operational issues. 	True 	p.690 
163. A recovery point objective is based on the point in time after which data obsolescence [the amount of missing data] becomes a problem. 	True 	p.690 
Questions 	Ans. 	Ref. 
164. The three steps for disaster recovery planning are: 
-	Determine how long each information system can remain unavailable. 
-	Determine how much data can be lost without causing problems. 
-	Establish formal procedures and arrangements for meeting recovery objectives. 	True 	p.690 
165. The three procedures and arrangements for disaster recovery are: -  Software and data back-ups. 
-	Alternate processing sites. 
-	Alternate working arrangements. 	True 	p.690-691 
 
